A baby lay there.
When I asked, ‘Is it a boy?’ it was a girl,
The finest among womankind,
One born of heroes.
‘She is a daughter of the wolf,’
Was what the heroes said;
And that was exactly what she was.
Every thought came into my mind:
Before she should go away to a husband,
I wished to share in her joys.
Manas was my friend until Judgment Day;
If Manas should have a son,
I wished to give her as his bride.
This is the matter I have to tell.
Before God Most High, for the only child,
I once made that promise.
Having found Chürök and brought her home,
I slaughtered ninety beasts for her feast.
Saying, ‘My senior wife has borne a maiden,’
I named her Chürök.
Become my co-father-in-law;
God has given you a child.
Lion lord, snow leopard,
Take her to be your daughter-in-law.”
Akun Khan spoke with pride:
“The Chürök whom I found
Is a fitting match for you, Khan Manas.”
Bloodthirsty snow-leopard Manas,
Delighted with Akun Khan,
Drove up seven hundred chestnut horses,
A sight that distracted all who beheld it.
Among the seven hundred,
Was a gray stallion of Kambar-Ata’s line;
He placed the gray stallion at their head,
And upon the gray stallion’s head
Displayed a blaze as broad as a pail.
He gave six hundred piebald horses,
Drove the livestock and became his co-father-in-law.
Great Manas bowed in homage,
Folded his hands and tasted the ceremonial fat.
Many words remain if one attends to them;
This was where they became pledged in betrothal.
The matter of that betrothal was settled,
At the games on Karkyra,
At Kökötöy’s celebration,
At Kökötöy’s funeral feast,
Before the great assembly.
All manner of people were there,
And the one directing the feast then
Was generous Khan Manas.
Manas emerged as khan of the Kyrgyz,
His courage driving the breath from foes.
The Black Kalmyk and Manchu hosts
Swarmed upon them by force of numbers.
When they were about to plunder and carry all away,
The sons of the Muslim faith
Were protected by snow-leopard Manas.
Kökötöy’s gold-crescented
Crimson banner
Was raised then by Bokmurun.
The uproar was too great for the earth to bear.
He had fire struck from the flint,
Bokmurun, the rich man’s son,
Summoned infidel and Muslim alike,
Inviting every one without exception.
He covered the earth in dust
And won renown among the people.
The Black Kalmyk and Manchu hosts
Had their mouths sealed and spoke no word.
The lion lord, brave Manas,
Was born for the good fortune
Of the people of the Muslim faith.
All the firewood was cut,
And the quarrels between infidel and Muslim
Were brought to an end.
Infidel and Muslim alike
Seethed in multitudes like black beetles.
