His sigh can split stone,
His snort can split a head,
He was a beast grown fat on rich pasture,
And on that ill-fated racehorse
There was a handspan of flank fat,
But he has drawn in his fat and tucked up his belly,
He looks ready for battle,
The creature is meant to be ridden to war,
It is clear he is ready to race into combat.”
He hastily saddled him,
And elder Akjoltoy took alarm:
“I shall circle the face of the earth,
And seek tidings of the warriors.
Many flatter you, saying, ‘You are heroes and lions,’
Many merely wink their eyes,
Many enemies wish to strike,
Many will scatter us if they can,
Many will overrun us if they have the strength,
In many places trouble brews,
And the hateful enemy harbors designs,
To preserve our lives and survival,
There are many who would keep the plow from turning,
Keep it from opening furrows in the earth,
Not let us take one free step,
Not let us sow any crops,
Not let us live in peace,
And seek to seize all we possess,
There are many champions who would bring calamity,
Many warriors who would take lives,
Many burn with bloodlust,
Many swagger, displaying their might,
And would slaughter us and spill our blood,
May they not ravage the people, torment the nation,
And bring countless disasters!”
In urgent alarm,
He donned his battle gear,
Summoned Köygashka,
Took him as his companion,
Gathered warriors whose host cast a vast shadow,
And rode out on patrol in alarm.
Your heroic elder Joltoy was keen-eyed,
A surveyor who watched and knew
All four corners of the world.
His words were plain when he spoke,
A true seer whose eyes were open,
A warrior who had traveled among countless peoples,
A man who could distinguish
An enemy from a kinsman.
Reading an omen from his steed,
He tightened the belt around his waist,
Faced the ridge and followed the tracks,
And when he reached the crest,
Ask not how the hero fared:
He drew the strap from his back,
And took the spyglass in his hand,
At all four corners of the world
He turned and gazed intently,
Seeking tidings from the land,
Toward the blessed Besh-Moynok
The horizon was hazy,
Seeking tidings of the people,
Beyond that visible valley,
On the far side of Jangyryk,
This side of the neighboring mountain,
Joltoy stood watching.
A fearsome cloud of dust rose from the pass,
Some forty men mingled with the dust,
Riding together and loosing arrows,
Following the length of Jar-Kyya,
Swinging swords and thrusting spears,
Competing in many different feats,
Their dust crashed into dust,
And whirled in the sky,
Their bearing and their grandeur,
Their appearance on horseback
Seemed extraordinary,
Their spears bore mail pennons,
And their arts of war
Each appeared distinct.
Their horses’ necks arched like swans,
They rode beasts of many kinds,
Finding no enemy to fight,
They rode about pouring out their wrath.
A thought occurred
To your formidable elder Joltoy:
“There is a ditch left by our fathers,
There is light within darkness,
There is a refuge if one flees in fright,
And there is a saying: before an angry man,
Oh, my child, do not make a show of force.
If you seek livestock, go early,
Once twilight falls, the eye cannot see,
Head off coming strife before it arrives,
Once a quarrel starts, words cannot reach it.
I shall bring them to reason,
Fold my hands, offer them food,
And bow my head, saying, ‘Stay,’
If they heed me and submit to reason,
