He rides a horse no bullet can overtake;
He is himself a surpassing giant,
The very image of my brother-in-law.
Ruddy-cheeked and imposing of face,
He is a mass of glowing red embers;
No one like him exists in the world.
He is my brother-in-law himself,
And the time has come for him to embrace
My poor, surpassing elder sister.
He wears a coat with a golden collar
And rides mountain-like Buurul.
A banner can be seen in his hand;
The sight opens the heart.
He is my khanly brother-in-law himself,
And out upon the games in the field,
Without growing weary, the time has come
For him to meet my elder sister!"
When they heard this news,
Thirty daughters-in-law and thirty maidens,
With Aychurok in their midst,
All leaned out and stared
At the one who had come to the farther bank.
Saying, "Our wondrous brother-in-law has come,"
Thirty daughters-in-law and thirty maidens
Leaned out and watched with delight.
Those who did not know began to speak:
"It is our brother-in-law himself;
If not himself, it is his very dark eye.
Having tired his horse and scouted the road,
He has come from far away;
It is our lion brother-in-law himself!"
While the maidens and daughters-in-law spoke thus,
Your precious Churok said this:
"You grew in a desert no person ever saw—
Damn your fathers' graves, maidens and brides—
And stand astonished by this creature.
He scouts the crossing with a haughty air.
Your brother-in-law is not one who would come first;
He is not the one who would come first,
Nor some clumsy, staggering boy
Who would scout the ford himself!
You opium-assed waddlers,
You wretches who have never seen a man!
What will you do when you see his young one?
You would mount his companion;
What will you do when you see the great one?
You would mount the little fry;
What will you do when you see the great catfish?
With a face like oiled wheat,
And eyes like twilight mist,
His enormity equal to half a mountain,
As though he would devour all he sees—
What will you do when you see your lord?
Have you heard the tale?
Long ago my father-in-law, the heroic lion,
Lived many years without seeing a child;
At first he remained childless,
Then saw his gray wolf son
At fifty-two years of age.
Saying, 'At last I have seen my son,'
My heroic father-in-law who has passed
Slaughtered ninety beasts for his feast.
Giant Koshoy of the unseen gave the name,
And he received the name Semetey.
When the child was newly born,
Making plans of surpassing greatness,
They summoned everyone without exception,
Infidel and Muslim alike,
And held an extraordinary feast.
The people gathered for his feast;
The Russians ate of his feast and departed,
Saying, 'If this child lives,
He will rout the Oyrat.'
The Chinese ate of his feast and departed,
Saying, 'If this child lives,
He will throw the age into turmoil.'
When provoked to vengeance,
He struck down his own elder brother,
