Became a horse lower than a swine.
She bound his forelegs and hindlegs fast,
And brought humiliation upon the bay horse.
She made that bay horse a nag,
A stunted thing unable to keep pace with sheep;
Binding his forelegs, she disgraced him,
Binding his hindlegs, she made him slow as an ox.
Then Aichürök
Dealt treacherously with the wicked bay horse:
She lashed him hard from either side,
And drove her heels into him left and right.
Tireless Chürök travelled on,
Covering a great distance without sparing the horse.
God granted her desire:
That day she saw her son and brother-in-law
Alive and unharmed.
At twilight, as the sun went down
And the foremost of the people lay in pairs,
At a spur where the mountain ended,
Upon a bare projecting knoll,
Aichürök arrived without stopping
At a spreading tree where the people rested.
From the restless bay horse
She removed the saddle and left him bare,
Hobbled and tethered him securely,
Then used the white saddle-frame as her pillow,
Lying with her head toward the qibla.
She placed the leather saddlecloth and blue pad
Beneath her hip as bedding,
And that day the woman Aichürök
Fell into a mighty sleep.
Propping herself on one elbow, she slept,
Dozed awhile and rested peacefully,
Lay on her side and eased her soul,
And slept until she was satisfied.
When dawn arrived,
She awoke with a start,
Turned onto her right side,
Recalled Er Kyyaz with alarm,
And saddled Tootoru.
She resolved to settle the score,
And to perform a wonder
Upon the beastly charger Tootoru.
The valiant woman Aichürök
Was a being of sacred power:
Her tongue bore a mystic seal,
Her curses never missed their mark,
And her spells were never cast in vain.
When Chürök was still a maiden,
She had recited wondrous incantations;
Those who saw her power recoiled,
And those who saw her deeds marvelled.
No living soul knew all that she knew,
And she never went without reciting spells.
She was a mighty sorceress and rain-maker—
Behold this art possessed
By the unfortunate daughter of Akun!
Upon the formidable bay charger,
Upon each moving hoof,
She cast a chilling spell,
And did this marvel
To the beast that had bolted with her.
Before one could cry, “Turn this way or that,”
In the blink of an eye,
She made the powerful bay horse
Unable to keep pace with a sheep.
That peerless charger, the bay horse,
She made unable to keep pace with an ox.
He could no longer trot straight,
Nor recover his former strength;
He could not even keep pace with sheep.
The great bay horse had bolted away,
Intent on subduing Aichürök,
But majestic Aichürök
Bound the matchless charger’s fleetness
And reduced him to an ox.
He could no longer trot as before,
Nor recover his former strength;
An hour after he had bolted,
His heel was scarcely a handspan—
