When the warrior raised it with a shout
And stood in all his menace,
Kongurbay, khan of Beijing,
And the khan of Kakan had recoiled.
Now that battle-axe of your bloodthirsty hero
Was in the hands of the infidel Kanchoro,
That ravager of nations,
That warrior in the fullness of his strength.
It hung ready upon his arm
As he surrounded and drove the vast black host of Jediger,
Pressing them onward in panic.
He made Köktelki, Köbösh Khan’s horse,
Prance proudly beneath him.
His courage was firm and his venom strong;
He threw every man he met into panic.
The flame issuing from his mouth
Was like the fire of a hand cannon;
The corners of his two eyes
Glowed like the embers of a vulture-lord.
His nose was like a swollen leather sack;
His tightly curled mustache
Was like a saber from Bukhara.
The fire burning in his two eyes
Was like a blaze flaming through a valley.
Kanchoro, calamity incarnate—
Such was his true might.
His two shoulders jutted high,
As though two giant black eagles perched upon them.
His two cheeks bulged,
Enough to feast two giants.
If he stirred, he seemed ready
To slaughter and drive off all the Kyrgyz.
When he barked out his cries,
His harsh, piercing voice
Was like a bolt of lightning.
None in the world could match his power;
He seemed ready to devour anyone who fought him.
His intention and design
Were to drive off and consume the Kyrgyz.
When the madman stirred,
He seemed already stained crimson,
His purpose firm as a mountain spur.
At Aichürök’s palace,
That accursed Kanchoro
Loosed his bow like pouring rain
And shot other arrows like hailstones.
The bowshots whistled,
The shafts curved through the air;
When they struck the palace,
Your sister-in-law despaired of life.
His army surged forward in turmoil;
To take the woman as plunder,
Kanchoro flooded in,
With greater numbers than before.
They raised fierce cries and clamor,
Playing drums and brass pipes;
They had the great drum sound the signal
And stunned all ears with its thunder.
At their center was a broad mountain ridge
Of warriors from many tribes.
At their head came
Kanchoro, the lionhearted hero.
The woman was alone, while they were countless—
How could her frail life not burn with anguish?
A roar rose before the gate;
When one listened to the herald’s voice,
He cried, “Kanchoro Khan!”
They loosed their bows like pouring rain
And fired their guns in volleys.
With Kanchoro Khan at their head,
They surrounded your sister-in-law at the gate
And steadily closed upon her.
When they entered the palace, he commanded:
“Seize the slave woman, seize her!
Bind her hands and feet;
Torment her and subdue her.
If she will not heed what she is told,
If she will not go where she is driven,
