And singled out our foes without relent.
While my panther uncle lived,
We were guardians of the people;
We bore the aspect of princes,
We were the black eyes of the spring,
We were panther-hearted heroes ourselves.
While the precious gray wolf lived,
We were red-flaming caps of steel,
A blazing crimson fire
That stirred strife wherever war cries rang.
While the panther lived,
We were dark, keen caps of steel,
The splendor of the foe when put to flight,
A darkly burning fire
No sudden assault could extinguish.
While my great warrior lived,
We were the wind in the narrow mountain pass.
Yielding to none who fought us,
We were champions, ravenous lions;
We were the gray wolf’s true eyes,
The very flower of heroes.
He broke through dead ends and opened roads,
And attacked whatever foe he met.
Konurbai came from the Khakan’s realm
To the lands along Ala-Too,
But while my warrior still lived,
He could not defeat him in combat.
Khans and Manchu lords were crushed;
When the seer in Beijing beheld my bearing,
He wept, saying, “He is no mere mortal.”
Thus the diviner in Beijing wept.
The great Kaldai rode out to war,
And Konurbai too was crushed;
Unable to endure my warrior,
The people of the Khakan wept.
When they diverted the flowing water
And left the Muslim people thirsty,
When the black Manchu and the countless Shibe
Were pressed hard by their Kaldai,
I crossed straight over and opened a road.
While my ruined uncle lived,
He never failed to raise laughter,
Yet burned to enter battle
And put his power and strength to the test.
My lion uncle was a champion;
Another mortal like my uncle
Will never again be fashioned
And given life in this world.
My towering uncle was a mighty hero—
Alas, this treacherous world!
No such warrior will arise from humankind.
His fortune was perfectly balanced;
If you could see inside that hero,
His heart was broader than the face of the earth.
A gray tiger upheld him;
No other soul could move as he did.
A dragon followed him,
A panther went beside him;
No mortal could defeat him when he advanced,
And no enemy dared confront him.
No man dared exchange blows with him;
When he fought in earnest, none survived.
Those who faced him fled the land,
And none who met him escaped alive.
When he charged in wrath
And grappled, he set men’s souls aflame.
When that dread-inspiring prince
Turned his front upon the foe,
He bore the form of a dragon;
When the hero turned his back,
He bore the majesty of six thousand warriors.
Ah, while the gray wolf lived,
We drew our bows and tested our strength,
Testing all our might.
Firing matchlocks and drawing bows,
Shattering every target,
We stood thundering in earnest
And slaughtered all who challenged us.
We heaped humiliation on those who would not yield;
Whenever an enemy closed with us,
