I have honored them with an invitation to the feast;
Hey, Ezkara, hear this!
Kökötöy's livestock left at his death,
The treasure filling forty rooms—
I will open the treasure-house,
And for each honored chief who comes,
I will scatter him his share.
Say he must come to this feast of mine,
Say he must see these festivities!
If he does not come to this feast of mine,
If he does not see these festivities,
I will bear down from above
On the Manchu who attacks you from above;
I will overrun his city
And scatter all four kinds of his livestock!
When you travel farther on,
There is the famous city of Kakanchyn.
In Kakanchyn there are khanly tribes,
And many seething chiefs.
There are mines in the mountains where tea is gathered;
Far-famed Beijing is a mighty realm.
There is a people called the Tyrgoot;
Among the seething Chinese
There are many kinds of souls.
Those infidel Tyrgoot
Have a woman set up as their khan.
When that woman grows wrathful,
If she chances to ride out to joust,
She has the strength of nine thousand souls.
The woman's name is Kanyshay,
A huge woman whose buttocks fill an embrace.
Her wrestling strength is immense,
A peerless champion born a woman.
Her dwelling was a building set upon the steppe;
Such was that woman's domain.
She became a mighty khan over the Tyrgoot;
Seeking to seize her khanate,
Many Chinese giants were laid low.
Her chosen husband is Muzkindik,
Those who know him speak his name.
She is Muzkindik's wife;
Reach her and deliver the message.
Say that the instant she hears,
She must come to Kökötöy's memorial feast.
If she does not come the instant she hears,
Say she will see Kökötöy's red banner
Above her own dwelling.
Say it will utterly destroy
And smoothly sweep away the Tyrgoot people!
When you travel farther on,
By the mines where gold is dug,
On the banks of the Sary-Suu,
The roaring Sary-Suu of Kürpüldök,
Along the Sary-Suu,
The looming monastery appears.
When you reach that monastery,
There is the Chinese holy man
With a red beard and a cap,
Who never wears trousers
And never squats to urinate.
In that monastery lives the kechil;
Such is the kechil's custom:
When his ox ages and he himself dies,
It is the infidel's custom
To divide the dead man's property equally.
He raises his billy goat as a sacred offering.
The horse he rides is holy;
Taking no wife, the Lama
Is a stranger to women.
He saddles his unbroken horse,
Ties on his staff, saying “God,”
And bows down to that very thing.
With a cotton sash and broad boots,
An imposing peerless champion,
Kongurbai is khan of the kechil.
Tell the most cunning of the spearmen,
Tell the one who knows the enemy's stratagems,
Tell the strongest man.
Kökötöy's son Bokmurun—
