When will you see his face again?!
If the moon is covered in darkness,
What will become of the night?!
If, by chance, amid the shooting,
If, by mischance, amid the struggle,
You fail to return,
What will become of the days
Of wretched me, Aichürök?!
Without ill words, there are no good ones;
Without madness, there is no shaman.
Do not begin turmoil in Beijing;
My leopard, greater than other men,
Do not abandon your poor wife!
If you go to Beijing, take me with you;
When you reach the appointed place,
Slaughter disgraced, wretched me
There as a sacrifice!
Dig my grave broad,
And do not make me suffer hell while alive;
With your own hands, my gray wolf,
Place this disgraced, fierce woman
In that appointed place!
If, by chance, you pass away,
The black-cheeked battle-axe—
Who will mount it without letting it droop?
If Kyrgyz and Argyn remain,
Who will lead them without wreaking havoc?!
The battle-axe with a hawthorn haft—
Who will mount it without letting it whirl?
The surging Argyn and Kyrgyz—
Who will lead them without scattering them?!
If the journey lasts six months,
The tulpar’s head will turn to brain;
Among the many Argyn and Kyrgyz people,
Which one will come to be their master?!
You have prepared your stallion for Kakan,
And made great preparations to depart,
Leaving your Argyn and Kyrgyz people
Thus abandoned and desolate!
Your journey has become a distant one;
Your news may come from death!”
Having spoken such dreadful words,
Aichürök went openly
Before your gray wolf.
Swaying like a silk cushion,
Speaking with a tinkling laugh,
The white reins tied in a loop—
The wretched woman stepped playfully
And snatched them from his hand.
Twining herself in the reins,
She remained screaming and weeping;
Wrapping herself in the stirrup-leather,
She wept without restraint.
From the wretched woman’s singularly fair face,
White as the risen moon,
Tears now flowed untouched;
From her white face lit as by the sun,
Tears flowed as dusk gathered.
She sobbed in grief and wept,
Turning aside, she screamed and wept,
Saying, “When you reconnoiter Beijing, you will see;
When will you return to your poor wife?”
“Beijing is six months distant—
Take heed and do not call the road easy;
The Chinese people bring mighty suffering,
Do not despise them as weaker than men!
Beijing is five months distant—
Do not call its passes a short road;
Do not despise the restless Black Chinese
As inferior to other men!
Your opponent is the Kakanchin;
Without ill words there are no good ones.
If the moon is veiled in darkness,
What shall we do with the night?!
If death arrives and your days are done,
With no male child left behind,
What shall we do with our days?!
On the hard road toward Beijing,
