When the terrible battle broke out,
Among the Jediger of Jeti-Özön
There was their seventh, Khan Kyyaz;
When they swept upon us in fury
And reached your princely father,
The moon-crested banner filled the sky,
And a clamor split the heavens.
While battle raged,
The sun grew black and night descended,
And a woeful day of anguish fell.
Though we looked, he was nowhere in sight;
Your leopard father, the blood-stained lion,
No one knew where he was.
However we searched, he could not be seen;
Whether the hero was dead or alive,
No one knew where he was.
His horse failed him and left him on foot,
And the people stripped the clothes from his body.
When the multitude surrounded him, thrusting spears,
And the whole nation came in uproar,
Though we looked, he was nowhere in sight,
And no one knew where he was;
He had mysteriously disappeared.
His dead body was nowhere to be found,
Your blood-stained father had vanished from sight,
And passed into the unseen.
If we follow the lore handed down,
And ask those who know,
They speak confused and rambling words,
And tell many tales that divide the people.
Not one person says, “I saw him”;
We wailed long and grieved,
For thus we lost our gray-maned wolf.
We did not behold the noble hero’s corpse
And bind it with brocade,
Nor wash it with Zamzam water.
We swallowed blood, red with bloodshed,
Donned black and clawed our faces,
But did not stand at the funeral rites
Of your noble father, the gray-maned wolf.
My gown was slashed to tatters,
And every humiliation befell my head.
My head was consigned to plunder,
My life was bound to pillage;
I endured many grievous trials.
The royal camp burned and was widowed,
My noble head was made a slave,
And I burned and blazed like an ember.
In my anguish I wished to die,
But I lived on, my Seytek,
Because you were six months in my womb.
Because of you, young hero,
Much of my wealth was destroyed,
And my poor flesh, once fair as the moon,
Was sliced like strips for a saddle strap.
Our strength failed however much we wailed,
And we elders were driven away as spoil.
Our eyes could see no way ahead,
And our people suffered great misery.
Some of us fled to the Kazakhs,
And encountered torment and affliction.
We cried aloud in grief,
All the scattered villages and wandering folk,
For we had lost your father.
The edge of my steel was blunted
When I lost the leopard-born, blood-stained lion,
Your own father and khan.
Though we looked, he was nowhere in sight,
And from that day to this,
There has been no remedy; every soul stands alone,
Unable to go where he went.
We do not know whether he is dead or alive,
And cannot discover where he is.
Who knows whether he lives or is dead?
Not a soul has learned the truth of his fate.
At Kara-Buura and Chatkal,
The massed enemy raised an uproar,
Striking their war drums with a crash,
Firing muskets and drawing bows,
And the dreadful battle grew fierce.
