Kyzyl-Kyya is a narrow road—
He took possession of it, I heard.
Muradyl surpassed the Chinese
And became a giant, I heard!
That infidel Muradyl
Has a champion who goes out on watch;
Beside Muradyl
He also has his “Kangön men.”
He has skilled men who scout the ground,
And foremost men with open eyes
Who examine the reconnaissance closely.
Külchoro and Kanchoro,
Understand what I have told you;
Say, “Our lion uncle told us,”
Lion-hearted children, heed my words.
Be watchful in this place;
Do not prop yourselves on your elbows and sleep.
The foe you will grapple with is the Kakanchin;
Do not even doze or take your ease!
Accept what I have said and understand!
The one you will contend with is Bakburchun;
My children, understand this.
Beijing is no easy land,
And the Chinese are no people to play with.
It is a capital city with fortifications,
With a people divided into forty branches.
My precious children, heed my words!
Take care over what I have told you;
Cover every one of the choice coursers
With its abai covering!
When you put on those coverings,
Remove their saddles and leave them bare-backed;
Put hobbles on every one
Of the choice coursers and tether them!
You have never yet attacked an enemy,
You do not yet know an enemy’s worth;
You have never chosen and ridden a courser,
You do not yet know a horse’s worth;
You have never ridden out on a journey,
You were still raw youths who drank no spirits.
Külchoro and Kanchoro,
You were swaggering, heedless souls
Who did not obey what you were told!
Listen to my words like this,
Or I will open your eyes like umach!
Kanchoro and Külchoro
Hummed away without a care;
They did not value those words of Bakai
As much as the hem of their garments.
They carved rump meat and put in mane-fat;
His boys did not worry,
But threw it all together into the cauldron.
They played chatyrash with a clamor,
Playing games and raising dust.
The rogues who had grown up at play
Kept playing without a care;
They did not value your formidable uncle Bakai
As much as his scabbard-strap.
Without tethering the horses or making ready,
They lay down in the tent they had pitched.
