Though Külchoro was born a lion,
He could not defeat him in wrestling;
Ah, tender youth—
He could not overcome the immature dog.
The foe he met was Sarybay;
When they crossed the facing slopes,
When they opposed each other and raised conflict,
When they came face-to-face,
Only a spoonful of my blood remained,
My flesh was left a blue, pulpy mass.
My frail soul shrieked,
The bones of my limbs cracked;
Truly, I have been grievously wounded.
The moon is dark and the night is thin;
What will become of us at night
If the swine attacks the exhausted?
What will become of us by day?
My arms hang numb and palsied;
Thinking of it leaves the head bewildered,
And the mind scattered among countless cares.
Sixty sorrows and a thousand ordeals
Appear close before my brow.
I find no people to stand behind me,
No lion to join me in combat;
I have neither musket nor support.
What manner of encampment will remain
For my diminished Kyrgyz people?
The noble Kyrgyz in their white kalpaks
Have broad pastures and open roads.
When the khan desired, they slaughtered sheep,
And prepared feasts for all the people.
What fate will befall
My blessed nation?
He shook and bowed his head:
Let us look to my blood-conquering uncle,
My hero, the support at my waist,
My mighty and seasoned lion.
If I send Akjoltoy before him,
He will lead troops as countless as hosts.
With my father, the blue-maned lion,
They spurred on like yearling colts,
Contended while nursing at the breast,
Sliced fat meat and ate the mane,
And ate rich butter with cream.
They had been companions from infancy,
And those who departed grew to maturity;
Their clans had settled there from the beginning,
With inexhaustible treasure,
And possessions beyond measure.
My gallant uncle Külchoro
Stands grievously wounded;
His power is spent, his strength gone,
And my joyous people are in mourning.
Death takes many forms, all different;
Solitude differs, and so does every man.
God the Creator fashions His servants,
Each in a different way.
My first forefather Manas was a lion,
Whose strength had no equal in the world.
Yet He made his descendants feeble,
And made mankind weak;
Almighty Allah in His power
Made mankind frail—
What varied mortals He created!
Sarybay is mighty in courage,
That hideous boar.
He turned fortified folk to blood;
Can I devise a means against him,
Avenge myself upon that cunning lion,
And take vengeance on that son of a bitch?
Before him, shouting,
My heroic father, like a prophet,
Would invoke Manas as his battle cry,
Commanding, ‘Gather the scattered treasure!’
My wounded soul would rejoice,
My brow would open like the dawn,
The grief within my belly would disperse,
My aching places would be soothed,
The foe I faced would be defeated,
The ruthless enemy overcome.
