Lashed by the whip, my flesh was torn,
My blood poured darkly forth.
They made me settle all accounts,
And slashed my breasts to wounds.
They stripped me of all my possessions,
My splendid gown and flowing trousers—
Your wretched mother has endured countless sorrows.
They had my fine clothes torn to shreds,
An arrow struck me in the horde, and I was captured;
Thinking back, I was beaten soft as wool,
Endured great misery and was sold,
And this head was bound to torment.
My heart departed, torn asunder,
My poor soul was sorely tried,
And I was dragged like a goat in kökbörü,
Barefoot and bareheaded,
Kept captive, neither dead nor vanished,
Mauled like a goat in kökbörü,
Beaten and made rich plunder.
By day, my daylight turned to night;
Your mother, lovely as the moon,
Was beaten till she became like wool,
And all I saw was a day of darkness.
With death and misery in my thoughts,
You, Seytek, survivor of the ruin,
Poor soul not yet born,
Were six months within my womb.
When your caravan-leading father died,
In my anguish I wished to follow him.
I remained alive, my foal,
For the legacy left by my companion—
The six-month child within my womb,
The poor child, dearest of all.
In Jeti-Özön the Jediger
Dragged me by the nape and made me wool,
Plundered without restraint and made me a slave;
I came to know humiliation and grief,
And my sacred sides
Were lashed and torn by whips,
While my blood poured darkly forth.
Alas, Mother, where are our people?
When shall we reach them?
The Ala-Too, white with snow,
Is our inheritance from our fathers;
When shall we dwell along its skirts?
When shall we tether the many fleet steeds
And barren mares?
When shall we don and proudly toss
Our twin lynx-and-sable caps?
When shall we ride colts and fly falcons,
And live in happiness?
When shall we rally the clamoring people,
Muster an army, and gird our waists?
When shall we pursue the blood-price
Of my lionhearted father, the departed hero?”
Thus spoke the valiant Seytek,
Joining his mother,
And asking her about his people.
Before he had finished asking,
Before he had finished speaking,
Before she could bring herself to tell the dreadful words,
Before she could recount the deeds
Of the vanished blood-stained warrior,
Then Aichürök
Spoke at length of the land:
“Your mighty forefather was the perfect Manas,
And broad Talas was his dwelling place.
That land is your inheritance from your forefather,
Your people, inherited from your father,
Are the legacy that was lost.
My young hero, because of you,
Whatever I grasped became burning embers,
Whatever I crossed became red fire,
Whatever I ate became a bullet of steel.
My hands were bound behind my back;
Helpless under such humiliation,
I yearned for death in earnest.
There was no swift steed to mount,
No kinsman to stand at my side.
The ramparts around me were my very ribs.
