While Seytek’s wits had fled in panic.
From his father, the gray-maned warrior,
Seytek had fled that day.
He had raised many a battle cry,
Then gone to his gray-maned warrior father
And made his plea.
At the many-hued golden pavilion,
He said to hero Semetey:
“You became a champion, you became a lion;
I am Seytek, your son.
Unable to prevail against the foe I faced,
I was laid level with the black earth.
My strength and power failed;
The monstrous giant’s warrior son appeared,
And your son Seytek, your poor wretch,
Could not withstand the foe he challenged,
But was brought level with the black earth.
God did not take this helpless man;
Yet rather than leave a man alive—
The powerless have no honor,
And a shot fired into the world brings shame.
I burned and seethed like an ember;
Though born of a hero, I, Seytek,
Was as nothing beside Sarybay.
When we came face-to-face,
My whole body quivered,
My tiny soul cried out,
My noble head ran with blood,
And my entire frame was crushed.
My strong waist bent beneath me,
My strength ebbed and my gear hung loose,
And both my eyes bulged.
My arms failed, and I grieved;
I despaired of my beloved people.
He made my nation wail,
And utterly broke my back;
It was as though he tore out my very marrow,
As though he broke my spirit.
He bound and blighted my flourishing fortune,
This raging son of the monstrous giant.
“He meant to break my proud brow,
Carry off my people as plunder,
And would have broken my back.”
So spoke hero Seytek,
Telling it all to his lionhearted father,
Relating horrors no man could imagine.
His son Seytek told him this,
Speaking truth, not falsehood:
“When that mad brute thrust his spear,
No champion could stand against him.
I would have perished, had not
My forefather Manas upheld me.
My mind is weary and my strength is gone;
The savage swine has truly prevailed.”
When his son had spoken thus,
His father flared in anger, caring nothing,
Scorning the infidel, huge as Mount Karaskar,
As though he were not worth the hem of his robe.
The gray-maned chief of sixty champions
Rose in wrath and struck terror,
And had Buurul, his campaign steed,
Saddled once again from the beginning,
To face the warrior son of the monstrous giant,
And test him in combat;
To die if hostile fate had come,
Or grapple with him and strike with his spear,
And, if his surging strength prevailed,
To spill Sarybay’s blood.
His fury boiled and he ground stones in his teeth,
Eager to unleash a fearsome slaughter,
And wrest the Kyrgyz, blessed by Kyzır,
From the hands
Of the Kalmyks.
Seytek had grieved in deep distress.
O father, splendid champion, noble lion,
Clad in blue steel,
And made ready at the word “enemy”;
To the noble lion himself
Inspiration came from the unseen,
And power streamed from his majesty,
