Such was Külchoro's nature,
His bloodlust seized him.
Power surged from his imposing frame,
And from the fire of his two cheeks
Sprang enough hair to fill a stocking.
Whenever Külchoro grew impassioned,
He would take his spear in his right hand,
And when wrath made him stand rigid,
He would bring slaughter upon the world.
When he truly gripped its shaft,
When the lone champion took it in hand,
He would scout the road alone,
Rout Jeti-Kait and seize its spoils.
If an enemy boasted of strength,
He shook down the mightiest.
He drove strongmen into flight,
And when an enemy came to grapple,
He drove his black-steel spear
Deep between his ribs.
When Semetey's cause fell to him,
Elkindi became his mountain encampment.
He made the whole world submit,
A lionhearted hero who spared himself nothing.
He flashed like a bird of prey,
Cracked like a white musket,
And spoke without holding back.
The tiger he held did not move
Or stir in the slightest.
He thundered in fury,
As though about to deal death,
As though about to take the bloodthirsty hero's life,
As though about to cut off his head,
Carry it to his son Seytek and Chürök,
And plunge the gray-maned hero into turmoil,
Then take the severed head
To Khan Bakai and Kanykei,
To those two aged ones,
And announce the glad news.
His forearms were thick as a strongman's,
As though he might bring slaughter upon the world.
If anyone challenged his wrath,
He seemed ready to swallow whoever crossed him.
Such was Choro when you saw him,
A lionhearted hero supported by the spirits,
Renowned as a hero and ruler of the people,
A steel fortress in Talas for Kyrgyz and Argyn,
Through which no wind could pass.
Since this bloodthirsty hero slipped from his grasp,
His anguish had been immense,
His burning grief a fire of hell,
His wandering a black and lightless night,
Until he burned, died down, and became ash.
While the valiant gray-maned hero lived,
He exulted above all other mortals.
When the valiant hero passed from sight,
He withered under boundless torment.
The deeply grieving Külchoro
Was struck by dawn upon the road.
Good heavens, when the valiant man fell into his hands—
He spoke no word and uttered no sound,
There was no eye that had truly seen him,
No word that he had returned alive;
If said to be dead, he was not in the grave,
If said to be alive, he was nowhere among men,
If said to be safe, he was not among the herds.
His insides ached and his breast was aflame,
And he had no kinsman besides Choro.
What exists today is gone tomorrow;
Such filth, it seems, is this world.
Then Külchoro
Began pouring out his words,
And if the gray-maned lion would not heed
The words he poured forth, he would kill him.
Choking with resentment,
His temper darkly changed,
He ground his teeth until they cracked,
His eyes blazing with rage,
As though he would camp along the Seven Valleys,
As though he would swallow the whole world,
His lion's eyes blazed,
