“What dire hardship, what grievous plight!
What will become of the people?”
“The madman grows more violent,
And will suck out every soul.”
Külchoro was a lion upheld by the saints,
A hero fit to face the foe,
The very backbone of these Kyrgyz.
He was a khan like a leopard,
With the courage of a lion.
“Trample the many foes beneath your feet;
God, if you created him as a living soul,
Keep Külchoro safe!
If anything happens to Külchoro,
Our backbone will be broken,
And our people massacred.
Our lifeblood will burst forth—
Thus will our breath leave us.
We stand here with purpose;
Make this merely an age of trial fallen upon us.
God, if you created him as a living soul,
God, keep Choro safe!”
The nation clamored and cried out,
And the people despaired of life.
Your infidel son of a monster
Could not be reached by fired bullets;
Thrust spears could not pierce him,
Nor would engulfing flames burn him.
The madman was invulnerable;
None knew where his mortal spot lay.
His champions were unlike other men,
And brought calamity upon our poor heads.
He raged bewilderingly through battle,
Breaking seventy spears,
Exposing muscle to bullets.
Armor impervious to bullets was torn,
And from the bullet-defying gray colt
The valiant Külchoro was parted.
For seven days he ranged about,
Wounding all he reached,
Until strength and power were exhausted;
I fear he has found his chance and struck.
Spreading wrath among the multitude,
You have given us an enemy, one God!
A calamity and affliction to the nation—
You have given us an enemy, one God!
The Ala-Too where you made your home
Was never conquered by a foe.
While bloodthirsty Manas lived,
We were a people dwelling in peace.
On the plain of Jylgynduu,
Along the broad Talas,
We would divide a whole sable skin
Into two halves
And wrap them around our leggings.
When bored, we hunted roe deer;
Kumis by day and girls by night,
We reveled with thunderous joy.
Eating the fat colts of barren mares,
With vodka and feasts in winter,
We used to revel with loud cries.
When desire stirred, we stayed up all night,
Slaughtering mares and playing ordo,
Hunting in rain and flying our birds.
In whatever way we pleased—
Where are the nights that were like the Night of Power?
Where are the flowers that stood in bloom?
Where are those former days of flowering?
Sarybai was no man, but venom;
He was the true God’s wrath!
Against the sons of these Kyrgyz
He came as a living calamity.
What enmity could your scorched dog
Possibly bear us?
Lamenting, souls wept;
All the people bowed their heads and wept,
Even children too young to understand wept.
Sarybai upon the battlefield
Revealed the calamity within him;
Before this foreign infidel,
The people despaired of life.
