Brave Semetey, the lionhearted warrior—
Was stricken at that very time
With an illness that left his ears unable to hear.
The moonlike lady Aichürök
Now sent word among the people.
Then they placed upon Seytek
A golden crown,
And seated him on the golden throne,
Making him a saintly sovereign,
And khan of the nation with its royal court.
Saying “Amen,” they made the gray-maned hero
A saintly sovereign,
And raised him up as khan!
Thus brave Seytek
Became the sultan.
He matured and became a warrior,
The equal of every valiant son,
A ruler of the people,
While all who opposed him were laid low—
Such was the youth he became.
There was no regret even in death,
And no one remained to turn back the herding crook.
The two reins and the single lead-rope
Were willingly placed in his hands.
At the very outset his heart
Bloomed like a flower and found peace;
The gray-maned Seytek became khan.
The people lived serenely, the nation rejoiced,
And the dear people regained their splendor.
No darkness remained; the lamp shone,
And the dear people came into the sunlight.
The hero Seytek became khan,
And every enemy who challenged him was laid low;
The fearsome foe was defeated,
And upon the dear people, like peaceful waters,
The days of happiness were showered.
He became khan and maintained a court,
A man of dignity;
Riding proudly, he governed the people,
Splitting a black hair with perfect judgment—
Brave Seytek was just.
His army numbered six vast divisions,
And he became khan of a mighty nation;
Thus did Seytek live.
Let us leave this tale here
And begin the news
Of Kuyaly of Kayypchal.
Maiden Kuyaly, the lionhearted champion,
Spoke softly but struck firm,
And began to speak in the court
To the gray-maned hero Semetey:
“When we depart for Judgment Day,
You will be the companion who comforts my soul.
For the guilt bringing hell upon the maiden,
When the hour came to grapple,
I invoked the name of God;
I made a binding vow.
I crushed the one who caused grief,
And checked your enemy;
Your foe Sarybay—
I killed him and burned his bones.
I measured out his life and brought it back.
I shouted in fury
And scattered his ashes into the sky.
Now that I have seen the one I watched for,
Now that my wish has been granted,
As yesterday we chewed white wheaten flour together
And wrestled after reciting the creed,
Remain true to that solemn oath!
Give me your pledged hand.
You are the support around which I gird my belt,
And on my appointed Resurrection Day
You are the husband I choose to wed—
Such is my desire.
This is the hour for which I have watched;
On the soiled road toward Judgment Day,
You are the companion who will clasp my hand.
My hero of boundless treasure,
Having battled with Alma,
You became Ur’s son.
