A star stirred in the heavens,
And in one night she awoke a thousand times;
She nursed me on her pure white milk
And fed me grains of white wheat.
She had an amulet hung around my neck,
Lest the enemy’s wrath strike me,
And had me raised in tenderness.
She reared me to maturity and made me a hero,
Made me the equal of heroic sons,
And raised a clamour when I was born.
My venerable white-haired mother,
Should the khan’s only prince
Have cause to wander in desolation?
My mother in this dark day, where are our people?
When will the day come that we reach them?
Should a noble prince’s only son
Have cause to roam as an exile?
My ill-fated mother, where are our people?
Across the yellow, rolling uplands,
When will the day come to cross the ridge?
When will we return to the land
Of willow-lined Keng-Kol and broad Talas?
When shall I cross them, dear mother—
Kara-Buura and broad Chatkal?
When shall I see, dear mother,
Those highlands where our people summer?
When shall we return to the uplands,
To my inheritance from my father,
To my Argyn and Kyrgyz people,
To keep court and dwell among the mountains?
When shall we return to the people
Of my ancestral inheritance,
Who play orompoi and strike the ordo stones?
When shall we cross the ridges
Of the two passes, Küyük and Chakmak?
When shall the mighty Kyrgyz and the many Argyn
Camp together in their villages
And open their hearts to laughter?
When shall we pass through the Seven Valleys
And reach our inheritance?”
The people cried out and the nation wept,
And while the multitude stood thus,
The hero’s son, Er Seytek,
Heard rumours among the people,
And heard that his mother had come.
Then Er Seytek
Heard the tale from Külchoro:
He learned that Semetey, gone to the other world,
Had been his father.
He grew angry and darkened,
His threatening face turned grim;
His black eyes became bloodshot,
His bloodied face turned ashen,
His heart became a fire of burning coals.
If the fierce one turned in wrath,
He became a blazing flame.
He made ready all his weapons,
And the fiery young eagle,
Hung at his side a sword without a sheath.
He heard the voice of the grief-stricken woman Chürök
And was deeply distressed,
Grieving for the lion father
Who had vanished from sight.
Seytek trembled violently,
His two cheeks turning pale;
The peerless grey-maned hero’s
Old wound of sorrow opened anew.
His gleaming teeth clenched together;
When the hero grew angry,
He seemed a fortress raised upon the hills,
And when he merely stirred,
He seemed ready to devour all mankind.
Leaning upon his keen blade,
His long, bony knees bending,
Er Seytek came running
To his mother:
“My dearest mother,
My gentle mother who cradled me,
Until the five Arkar stars had set,
You nursed me five times through the night,
