These Kyrgyz will become your people;
Spare them and do not slaughter them.
While we lived in Jeti-Özön,
Brave Kyyaz of the Jediger
Drove out your white-bearded elders
And all the people with them.
Some he imprisoned;
Others he simply
Beat without mercy.
Some people he plundered,
Aggrieving and humiliating them;
He withered their fly-like lives
And drove them here by force.
Is not Kyyaz the fool?
What guilt do the slaughtered people bear?
Is not your khan the fool?
What guilt does the common nation bear?
The people are treasure, the nation an inheritance.
My panther prince, do not slaughter your people.
When the horn is broken, strength is lost;
When the udder is crushed and gone,
The milk that sustains life is lost.
If you subjugate and slaughter the people,
Your nation will surely slip from your grasp.
Hero, heed our words;
Act with restraint.
Spare the great mass of your common subjects,
Hero—the people are your treasure.
Brave Kyyaz of the Jediger
Roused and gathered the Jediger of Jeti-Özön,
Whipping them into a frenzy.
Raving, ‘I will avenge the blood-debt,’
He drove them into madness,
Drove them here in misery,
Tormenting them and raising an uproar.
He drove us here in a long column;
We gathered together only
Because he said, ‘We shall attack the gray-maned hero.’
We never desired, hero,
For the people to be slaughtered.
As we set out for this place,
The birches fell and the willows wept.
‘We shall die if we face the bloodthirsty man!’
All the common people cried.
White-bearded old men wept,
Saying, ‘Now we shall be left without fathers’;
Children old enough to speak wept.
Brave Kyyaz’s oppression,
His countless acts of violence, fell upon us.
Women wept in grief;
We Jediger were herded here,
Despairing of our precious lives.
My prince, look upon us and heed our words.
If you do not believe these words,
You are the lion and we are sheep—
Then slaughter us outright.
If you believe no traitor lives among the people,
Then heed these words of mine:
Against Kyyaz of the Jediger,
Hero, wage single combat.
Tootoru, the swift horse ready for battle,
Is a racer famed for vanquishing nations;
Hero, take him as your prize.
Spare the innocent-hearted people;
Your foe to fight is brave Kyyaz.
Hero, face him in combat and see.
Against Kyyaz, ablaze with deadly fury,
Shout and level your spear.
Show your fearsome strength and valor
Against brave Kyyaz.
Since it was Kyyaz who stirred up the conflict,
If you attack these peaceful people,
It will bring you shame.
Brave Kyyaz of the Jediger
Is not nobler-born than you;
Look, hero, his courage is no greater than yours.
Roar and drive in your spear;
You are the heroic lion Choro—
