Broad-flanked as a mountain ridge.
He made all who fought him submit,
Like the noble lion he was.
The layers of arrow-proof armor he wore
Numbered eighty-four,
And wherever he wheeled became fire.
When he raged like this,
He brought slaughter upon the world;
When he charged in fury,
He shattered the foe before him
And hurled them onto their backs.
When anger drove him into a frenzy,
If a formidable, tumultuous foe appeared,
None survived without being slain.
Such was this formidable lion;
When anyone provoked him,
When his enmity became true,
He would strike down even his own father—
Such was the imperious lion,
Such were the eyes of the fire-damned man.
Sarybai, who had fixed his hostility upon them,
Came to wage a fierce struggle,
To spill and drink their blood,
To clash and scatter it, if strength allowed,
And test himself in surging combat;
If his strength failed and his power left him,
He would die at Sarybai’s hands.
Pouring out his wrath, he roared,
Calling his younger brother and son:
“Come, leave no one behind!”
Seytek and Külchoro
Heard him, and their hearts were torn;
The magnanimous elder kinsman
Poured venom from his mouth.
He had couched his steel spear,
As though drawing the whole age into his maw;
So greatly had his temper darkened,
It was as though he had swallowed
The entire wide world.
The force of his tumult was deep-rooted;
The slender, moon-waisted beauty in a crimson dress,
The graceful lovely woman,
The wretch had made into plunder
And delivered to Sarybai for pillage.
The enemy had descended from above,
Scattering the four kinds of livestock,
And all the noble-born people;
“How can I, princely gray wolf Külchoro,
Let the dog who descended upon you
Take them away as plunder?
How can I endure this humiliation?
If hostile death reaches me, I shall die.”
Speaking thus, Semetey
Gave himself over to fury;
His thirst for blood seized him.
Power burst from his countenance,
And from the fire of his two cheeks
Black hair sprang forth.
His broad white teeth, like a gateway,
Teeth unlike those of any mortal born,
He ground with a crackling sound.
Tormented, his eyes blazed;
His bloodlust truly seized him,
His eyelashes became embers in a fog,
And when he opened his mouth in wrath,
The breath that came from it
Was a blazing coal of flame.
His beard was like a quiver case,
And the windy words from his mouth
Were flames from a bellows-fed fire.
Such was the appearance
Of the dear lion-born hero:
He seemed able to humble every braggart,
And, when enraged at Sarybai,
While the bloodthirsty lion yet lived,
To deliver punishment with his own hands.
He was like the surge of a billowing lake,
And the magnanimous hero’s loftiness
Was like the wind of Ala-Too.
All living souls fled from his dread presence
