For him she braided her hair in sorrow;
After long delay, she finally saw him.
When the figure before her
Came into view, her heart was content:
He was the gift she had longed for
From the gray-maned hero who had died.
The spring flowing down the hillside,
The young hero left by the magnanimous lord,
The banner held within her hand,
The precious legacy she had received
From the banner-winning hero.
Born after his mother came as plunder,
He would cast the whole world into tumult.
The time had come when God fulfilled her wish.
The moon waned and the days passed;
Many years went by.
Living out her days in grief,
Drinking water through a reed,
Brave Seytek had grown up in suffering:
The time had come when God fulfilled her wish.
This very year your young hero
Had reached the age of twelve.
Calling the Seven Valleys his homeland,
Separated from broad Talas,
Leaving wooded Talas behind,
Leaving the joyous Kyrgyz people,
Plundered and plunged into grief,
The ill-fated young hero, still in the womb,
Was bereft of his father
And fled to make the Seven Valleys his home.
Separated from his father,
He drew strength from his mother Aichürök;
That dear land of the Seven Valleys
He fittingly made his home,
And the Jediger of the Seven Valleys
He fittingly made his people.
Despised, he nevertheless prospered;
Fatherless, he grew to manhood;
Battered, he nevertheless came of age,
And ninety beasts were slaughtered for his feast.
I have made my sorrow into song—
Hear my lament, Aichürök!
Let me open my eyes and behold him;
Let me open my mouth and kiss him;
Bring me your only son!
If your only child is a true champion,
I shall bind him at my waist as my support
And pursue the blood-price of the hero!
Smashing down their lattice walls,
Your young hero shall raise an uproar
And make their brides and maidens weep.
Let me cast hell among their throng;
If God lets me see that day,
As Kanchoro struts in his fullness,
I shall tear out his lungs and take his gall,
And beat the ancient fury from him.
For my dear mother Kanykey,
For my mother in her old age,
And for the heroic lord Bakay,
Let me strike one sacrificial blow!
Let me gouge out his glaring eyes
And drive him all the way from Talas!
The black blood within him
I shall suck down and drink my fill!”
So spoke Külchoro,
And wrath seized him;
Not a hair’s breadth of strength remained
In the ruined wretch,
Whose heart held countless regrets.
Before he could finish speaking,
In the blink of an eye,
Before anyone could say another word,
She darted away like a doe;
The luckless woman’s
Agility revealed itself.
Shaking off her troubled thoughts,
She ran to the white palace,
And when she brought the child,
The spring flowing from the valley,
The young hero she had borne amid death,
