"If he is fainthearted, he will skirt the edge
And slip past from the side," she said.
To satisfy the hearts of all who watched,
That unfortunate sister-in-law of yours
Had rugs and quilts together
Spread for the length of a spear as a barrier.
She startled and made sport
Of all the maidens and brides;
The quilts and rugs she had laid down
She made him ride over and trample,
As though they were spread upon the open road.
That same Churok thought:
"His forefathers before his father—
Will the offspring of that insolent line
Ride heedlessly across?
Will he shout, 'Come here, falcon!'
And, babbling wildly, carry all
The people of Akun to their ruin?"
Her moonlike face appeared;
The hem of her many-colored gown
Showed in wondrous beauty.
From among those maidens,
Gleaming as though moonlight struck her,
Your Churok, the daughter of Akun,
Stepped out alone.
As she walked, her face shone;
A little golden amulet
Rang upon her breast.
When she glanced around suddenly,
The human heart was overwhelmed.
Standing poised and serene,
She appeared like a peri.
She walked smiling and radiant;
Sixty clasps and forty pearl buttons
Glittered at her throat.
Fragrance wafted, and brass ornaments turned;
She smiled, overwhelming the heart.
A blue-lynx and beaver hat
Was visible upon the brow
Of that poor daughter of Akun.
Your extraordinarily beautiful sister-in-law
Had words sweeter than sugar.
Whoever saw her lost all sense;
Above her lip
She had a small beauty mark.
In what part could this doomed Churok
Possibly be found lacking?
If a man happened to see her,
The poor swaggering wretch,
If he were to behold your sister-in-law,
Might die before he reached Issyk-Kul.
To the young man riding the red horse Buurul,
Coming at an angle,
Your sister-in-law stretched forward and cried,
Calling, "Wait there!"
Veering like a swift horse,
Your grieving sister-in-law began to speak:
"Hey, boy! Turn your horse's head;
Stand there in the open place ahead!"
She waved and beckoned with her hand;
Aichurok, proud as a rooster,
Flung a taunt at him:
"My boy, turn your horse's head;
Stand there in the open place ahead!
Who is your battle cry, and what is your name?
You have dressed yourself splendidly;
Who are the in-laws joined to you by marriage?
My boy, do not break custom without cause.
If you are a traveler, here is the road;
If you are a raider, here is the livestock!
If you are thirsty, here is water;
If you wander seeking beauty, my dear,
Here are we, the beauties who pine!
If you would lie down, here is a tent and bed;
If you would make merry, here are we!
My boy, your Argyn and Kyrgyz people
Are nowhere here;
As though mounted upon your finest horse,
