Toward your prince standing there exposed,
They loosed their bows like pouring rain
And shot their arrows like hail.
With vigilant Kanchoro at their head,
They had chosen the path of treachery
And wrought a strange spectacle.
The great host of the Black Jediger,
Led by Kyyaz and Kanchoro,
Crossed the low, tawny foothill plain,
Advancing until they arrived.
When the vast army in its tens of thousands
Surged over the land and arrived,
The lone hero paced slowly, conserving his strength,
And reverence came over him;
The solitary gray-maned lion,
Leaning upon Akkelte,
Showed the mettle of a wolf
As he climbed untroubled
Onto a saddle-backed ridge.
He cared no more that the Jediger might engulf him
Than if they touched the hem of his robe.
Courage and defiant pride
Had been fashioned by my Lord,
Who had granted them without measure.
At the sight of the khan, the Jediger host
Burned inwardly with raging flame.
Deeply distressed, they raised an uproar,
Unable either to advance across the ridge
Toward Kyyaz and Kanchoro,
For fear had seized the multitude,
Or to turn back and flee;
Nor could they lower their spears with a battle cry
And overwhelm the lionhearted hero.
Confounded and anguished,
The multitude stood in an uproar.
Despairing of their borrowed lives, they said,
“He was our father—how could we
Have begun a battle against the bloody-handed hero?
When there are no black Manchus or Chinese here,
How could we take the head
Of the hero who was our protector?”
The people stirred and clamored,
And the ignorant repeated what the knowing said,
Whispering softly among themselves:
“His father was Manas, the gray-maned hero,
Born in Altai
When the Kyrgyz had been taken captive.
At twelve years of age,
He toppled kingdoms and took spoils,
And set the whole world in turmoil.
He was the hero who brought back
The Kyrgyz taken away to China.
To this scattered, dwindling people
He was like a father.
Oh, what can we do against this gray-maned lion?
He is the offspring of a lion,
A forested cape that scatters
The wind when storms descend.
He was a shield for multitudes;
Your blue-maned lion of a hero was a fortress.
People, let us scatter grain as an offering
And not assail that noble hero;
Let all the Jediger standing here
Rise as one and flee!
Their first forefather was Karagan;
When mighty Karagan died,
Many Kyrgyz were taken captive
And scattered to various lands.
When that Karagan died
And the enemy pressed in,
They slaughtered many of your elders,
Leaving all your yurt poles red with blood.
They carried your daughters off as spoil
After eating your salt countless times;
They destroyed your villages
And brutally cut open
Your pregnant wives.
Think, all you people—
