Sarybay raged beyond all bounds;
His bulletproof coat of mail
Was torn and shredded to pieces.
Külchoro suffered bitter hardship,
Raising cry after cry;
Almambet’s lion
Came to separate them.
Wearing the coat Aichürök had made,
And taking many Kyrgyz warriors
Who cut off heads when told to take caps,
Hero Seytek, Semetey’s son,
Advanced with his streaming banner raised;
The uproar seemed to split the earth.
He fought with consummate skill,
Thrusting his flawless spear,
And slew the finest
Of the accomplished champion’s men.
They stood face-to-face in combat,
Until both powerful arms
Of the young hero Seytek
Were paralyzed and could not be raised,
And his priceless golden head
Was wholly drenched in black blood.
For nine days he ranged in battle,
Receiving wounds all over his body.
The warriors staked all they possessed,
And, neither dead nor vanished,
Fought their way along the Ala-Too.
Against the monstrous infidel’s son,
The infidel who laid waste to the earth,
The very black angel of death,
The young hero could not prevail;
His dark eyes burned with anguish,
And he despaired of his entrusted life.
Seytek, the valiant lion,
Could no longer hold his ground,
And when he beheld the infidel’s full might,
He could not endure his dreadful form.
He grieved as he grappled with him,
And despaired of his entrusted life.
Sarybay had conceived a plan:
To pass through and slaughter them all,
To butcher their people without a survivor,
To leave not one Kyrgyz alive,
But make a massacre of them,
To cast their homeland into turmoil,
And take seventy wives and widowed sisters-in-law
Away as plunder.
Such was Sarybay’s intent,
Raging like a river in full flood,
Hardened by drinking his fill of blood,
And known throughout
The whole wide world as the monstrous giant’s son.
His strength was beyond compare,
His fury terrible, his venom potent;
Born in sand and reared on stone,
He had grown apart from decent men.
Scouring the desert, he had won his steed,
And earned the name “the monstrous giant’s son.”
Then Külchoro, upheld by the spirit Shay,
Against that roaring swine,
Charged and thrust his spear,
Tormenting and harrying
The tiny life within his breast.
He began a mighty struggle
For his true kindred people,
For the land where his cord was cut and birth-stains shed,
The land inherited from his forefathers.
He would not yield to the words
Of the monstrous infidel’s son,
The earth-scorching warrior,
The wrathful infidel
Whose arms were strong and venom fierce;
He would not surrender his hard-won land and people
To that merciless foe.
They stood locked in combat,
Fighting without rest for eighty days,
Striking and ranging back and forth,
Until Almambet’s lion
Had taken wounds in eighty places.
