She rode out into the open country.
It was a land of rolling hills and hollows,
Where springs flowed in torrents,
And nightingales sang sweetly,
Where eagle-owls hooted and called,
And nightingales displayed themselves in the willows,
Where cuckoos called from the birches
And roe deer cried in the thickets;
It was a land beyond compare,
Kara-Kyr of Jan-Baspas,
Known as the Kara-Kyr uplands.
When she came to that place,
Two men approached, riding tawny thoroughbreds
And carrying broad, long spears.
Like storm clouds returning with rain,
Wrath circled across their faces.
Their eyes were like opened grain pits,
Their faces like grains of oiled wheat;
They were tall and broad-shouldered,
Their massive bones like a fortress,
As though those who fought them would be crushed to flour.
Their ears were like shields,
Their bright eyes like the morning star.
Throwing the whole world into alarm,
They made the thoroughbreds beneath them
Pace forward with stately strides.
Blood burned from their fury,
And life itself sprang from their courage.
Tall as plane trees and rich in wisdom,
They were strikingly handsome, with imposing faces
And broad front teeth like gates.
Their deeds surpassed all others in the world.
They had a splendid red camel,
And loaded upon that camel
Was every treasure of this fleeting world.
Their majesty was great and their wrath was fierce;
Mighty husbandmen of wisdom,
Two men appeared before her.
They wore armor no arrow could pierce;
Ebegey and Kögöy rode at their head,
And behind them came a thousand troops.
When that army moved, it rumbled like an earthquake;
If one of its leaders unleashed destruction,
He could devour six thousand men.
With short stirrups and broad shoulders,
They bore formidable spears and battle-axes,
Their weapons and gear fully prepared.
Joybolot, the unsheathed sword,
Would not leave their side even in death.
21—2237
When they met and raced one another,
Their paired swift steeds, beyond an arrow’s reach,
Seemed to grapple with their mouths;
Akjoltoy and the hero Seytek were coming.
Their appearance and majestic bearing
Could reach a man’s soul without tiring,
And their courage could make the black earth
Quake and tremble beneath them.
Bolot opened his eyes and saw them;
Seeing them, Bolot was astonished.
The reins went slack and were drawn tight,
And all the heroes reined in.
The people gathered with a clamor.
There was none who did not urge on his horse;
If they fought in cruel battle,
No forehead would remain unbroken.
“Are we destined for slaughter?
Without attaining our cherished aim,
Are we destined to die?
Without returning to wife and child,
Are we destined to die?
Many among the people have cause for regret,
But I have abundant trust in fate,
And many are the people who will not halt.”
While the people stood thus,
Akjoltoy was among them,
And noble Seytek, equal to a vast host.
Their forms loomed like mountains;
The noble men rode between the armies
And separated themselves from the people.
They had not come to start a senseless quarrel,
But honored Kökbörü, their forefather’s friend,
And the true spirit of that valiant man
Who had departed for the other world.
They had come to settle among the people of Urum,
Calling it their inheritance from their fathers,
To arrange a marriage alliance for Kenen,
With the beauty named Aykanysh,
The dark-eyed maiden he desired,
The wondrous and graceful one,
The generous-hearted beauty.
They had come to place earrings upon her,
To embrace and make peace,
To bind themselves in marriage alliance,
To bow in homage and pledge their word,
To become in-laws and drive forth the bride-price herds,
To gather together and share rich butter,
And to meet face-to-face in reconciliation,
Having heard Ebegey’s counsel.
