The Argyn Kyrgyz rode forth,
Intent on slaughtering heroes.
Many a bride and many a maiden
They kept unmarried for many years;
Those who met them were laid low,
And noble heads were crushed.
For mortal folk until doomsday,
It became a deed never to be forgotten.
You ravaged the borders by force;
Though Kyrgyz by birth,
You wore the crimson collar.
You did a deed worse than any Chinese warrior.
Your forefathers were enemies by nature,
And you were born of Almambet.
You raised great tumult and uproar
And committed an exceptionally evil deed.
You cut down those who fled,
And did a deed never to leave our hearts;
You struck down all you met,
And felled all who crossed you.
You bloodied those who encountered you,
And slew all who came your way.
You broke my back many times,
And slaughtered still more of my people.
When the great host of black-clad Jediger
Swept forward, you drove it back;
You destroyed the leaders of the people
And parted us from our dear ones.
You bent and broke my back,
And swept away my warriors.
You scattered many brains,
And made slaves of my renowned men;
You tore open my throat and made it a road,
Slaughtered and disgraced my people,
And utterly destroyed my ancient line.
You turned summer into autumn
And laid my joyful ones in the dust;
Now you have fallen into my hands
And been caught in my iron net.
Though you lament, I shall not hear your plea.
His lashes are flame and his eyes are embers;
No man is so accursed as he.
Yesterday Chynkojo, son of Shygai—
A formidable lord in all he did—
Ravaged and slaughtered,
Killing my lionhearted hero Chynkojo;
Like a fire extinguished, he destroyed
My brave warrior Toltoy,
Who had broken my back so many times.
He cut down my mighty host.
He began a terrible conflict,
Leaving sixty women widowed,
And their villages desolate;
The women wept in widowhood,
Their children enslaved as spoils—
Thus he broke my back
And left many of my heroes in pain.
He extinguished the fire that burned,
And plundered all the Jediger
Who filled the Seven Valleys, driving them away.
He cut down those who challenged him,
And devoured all he encountered;
He brought those who fought him to ruin
And crushed all who crossed his path.
He ravaged Afghanistan and withdrew,
And set the Jediger aflame.
Orphans wailed, sons were left behind,
And slender-waisted women in crimson gowns
Were left trembling as widows.
Giants were broken and laid low,
And every valiant warrior left on foot.
He slaughtered countless elders,
And utterly destroyed all I possessed,
Making your Jediger blood
Flow like the waters of a river.
He ruined your homeland and left it bereaved,
And took every able-bodied son
As a captive household slave.
He chose the finest steeds and took them,
Though we were once kinsmen by birth.
