Girded on her scabbardless sword,
And donned armor no bullet could pierce;
Her heroism became apparent.
She performed deeds of many kinds
And made ready at the word “foe.”
Wisdom came to her from the unseen,
And she set her face toward Sarybai;
This is how the matter unfolded.
Across forked ridges and steep passes,
He led a seething predatory host;
The earth grew misty and eyes flashed—
Such was the ogre’s way.
Raging and straining,
He sheathed his arms in steel.
His eyes blazed like light;
Sarybai was the one she would grapple,
Such was the enemy she would fight.
That infidel Sarybai,
That warrior who destroyed nations,
Was filled with wrath and mighty venom,
Plotting cruel calamity,
And sparing no life in battle.
Destroying nations and drinking blood,
He drew deeply on his mighty strength;
Hardened by constant fighting,
He shed and drank blood in abundance
And became renowned as a bloodthirsty killer.
His valor was well known;
So terrible was his fury
That he proclaimed it to the whole world,
Raising shrill cries and clamor,
Raising a din that split the sky,
Menacing and frantic,
Possessed as though rabid.
His drums boomed and thundered,
Crashing like lightning,
While he roared in anger.
Every person who saw him
Shuddered through his entire body.
Shrill cries and urging shouts,
Motley banners and uproar—
He set the face of the earth ablaze,
As though he alone would encamp upon the heights.
The eighteen thousand worlds
He gulped at like a dragon,
As though that swine would swallow them now.
Upon the rugged hills and passes,
He seemed a giant black bird alighting;
Gulping like a dragon,
He seemed to swallow the whole world.
Most formidable, mighty in venom,
He leveled everyone he encountered;
If you met and faced him,
You abandoned hope of life, saying, “We are lost.”
A matchless champion, enormous in stature—
No giant like him exists in the world.
If you meet him head-on, take him from the flank;
He broke through herds and opened roads,
And attacked everyone he encountered.
Destroying nations and slaughtering peoples,
He hardened himself by wading through blood,
And among all the teeming peoples
Became renowned as a great calamity.
The knobs upon his two shoulders,
With two humps rising on each,
Seemed to have fed countless infidels
In the flames of his two cheeks.
Of the men who went to face him,
He seemed able to swallow countless numbers.
His eyes were like open pits;
The vastness of his nose
Was like the flank of a shattered mountain.
Could any creature be born like this?
When he attacked, would he spare a life?
His name was heard throughout the world;
Across the eighteen thousand worlds,
He had indeed raised an uproar.
His extraordinary form was unlike all others;
Among the whole wide world,
He had been born uniquely marked.
