And the preciousness of the hapless maiden
Became known to all the peoples of the age.
Her token was every fleet thoroughbred,
A steed worthy of a karat.
Because of the poison of this vile world,
For the sake of Aichürök,
Kartküröng and Buurul, two thoroughbreds,
And the brothers Ogoy and Shygai—
From Ogoy came fierce Er Manas,
And from Khan Shygai came Chynkojo—
Through Aichürök’s fierce power,
We brothers became strangers to one another.
We lashed our pinewood spears together
And fought one another many times,
Tearing lungs and spilling gall,
Nursing grudges and severing heads,
Standing opposed and crushing each other,
Splashing blood like black water,
Pouring out all our blood,
And shattering one another’s ribs.
For the sake of the golden moon,
Through desire for the woman Aichürök,
We stood on opposing sides,
Firing guns and drawing bows,
And fought in a bloody melee.
We tore all our coats to shreds;
Every hero strained for battle,
And boundless strife arose.
We fought beyond all reckoning,
Our reason divided and our inheritance cursed,
Fighting as though drunk on fat.
Never had settled peoples seen
Such a quarrel as this;
Though we were kin, enmity arose,
And none could cast it from his heart.
Her calamity will endure till Judgment Day—
This forlorn Aichürök,
Whom my father joined to me and made my household.
My wife, whom I chose and took,
Is setting out upon the journey with me.
Weary and darkened by the road,
With cruel death settled upon my heart,
Unable to laugh upon this journey,
I am descending into the earth.
Once gone, I shall not turn back;
When that day comes, I shall not return.
The soil is decreed and the earth awaits;
I am journeying into the ground.
My dear head, once buried, will not emerge;
I am going to the grave.
I am going to behold
Suffering and torment.
For the sins that have dwindled and been absolved,
Whatever their reckoning may be,
I am going to render account.
My sun exhausted and my moon complete,
I am going to return my entrusted soul
To Allah.
I am going to behold the destined,
Unbearable road of turmoil.
I am going to return
My precious soul to Allah.
Great and small, old and young,
Comrades, peers, and fellow strivers,
Untie every knot;
Whatever deeds, bad or good, have passed,
My dear people, forgive them!
Once we go, we shall not turn back;
We shall vanish and never return.
I was a gray-maned lion,
And you were a people radiant with sixfold glory.
You were a sultan’s word that never slept.
I journey upon an evil road;
You grieve—farewell, my beloved people!
You were a mountain pass between us
That no winged bird could cross.
One who drank by asking was never sated,
Never abandoning his ravenous hunger;
When driven through the darkness,
He prowled like a leopard.
