Looks bad,
Do you want to kill yourself?
The famous scandal
Does he disbelieve without shedding blood?
Does it happen out of boredom?
Rabies that caught fire
Will he see a soul if he prays?
It's deep, it's strong,
Does this happen to a person?'
All of Eren is burning,
Hero Seitek, Kulchoro
When the hero is like this,
The other was disappointed.
Another busy event came up.
If you think about it, power will come to you.
Blinking and burning,
We were really massacred.
Desperate like a fly.
Sarybai and Kulchoro couldn't get away from each other, they bowed and bowed
where you can't get it. When the two of them couldn't get along, Semetey came and laughed.
Choro and Semetei cannot reach Sarybay together. Can't reach yet
He dreams of what he did wrong by being such a man. Both tricks
When he passed away and was about to die, Aichüruk came and told the swan
wear it, walk around the land and compete with Sarybay
Looking for a man. Seven days disappeared, and Kuyaly, the daughter of Kayipchal,
Ban finds the girl and brings her with him. Girl's wrestling sign to the moon
does not give up. The size of the hem of the takiya was twelve cubits. People run
They said he was a wrestler, and Aichüruk found him and brought him with him. Son of a monster
When asked to wrestle with Sarybay, Kuyaly refused to be a female wrestler. "I'm a foot
"I won't cross the river if I don't solve it." Otherwise, this has a lot to do with it
he said, "I won't touch a slave when I'm rich."
It didn't happen. When he asked to take it to Seytek, he said: "When the father is standing, to the child."
"I won't touch" - he refused, but when Semetei asked him to take it, so did Semetey
did not happen. Because I did not receive a separate letter when I received Aichürek.
He said he has a place to spend the winter. The reason I cursed: "He would receive a letter
If so, the top of the head is blue, the chest is hairy, and the bloody sword is cut
He says that he swore to strike and let the white typhus bullet hit him. Then Kuya-
The wrestler girl says: "Otherwise, you and your people will be slaughtered by the man Sarybay
let him go I will not compete with you," he says. "You and I are from Sarybay
I can't separate, I can't be a mediator for you because I'm a predator
"- he says. Then Semetei was sent to Kulchoro, Seitek, Kanykei, Aichuruk,
All the people cried loudly. You really see a word of mouth.
If a problem falls apart from the perfect one, it will fry the offspring like salt
What will happen if Sarybay is killed, he hardly persuades Semetei to take it.
Semetei agreed and said to the wrestler Kuyaly, "Let's see each other in the doomsday."
got married.
The wrestler girl will be very grateful, and how many days and nights with Sarybay
competes. Sarybai was stabbed to death by a Kuyaly wrestler and his ashes were burned
