If you so desire, the Night of Destiny will come;
She is the steadfast strength behind you.
She is the soul who will await
The blessed one who restores your power.
If Kuyaly comes to you,
She will enrich the crown of your yurt.
She will make your true gray-wolf son
Khan over lands in every direction.
She will gild the lattice walls of your yurt;
When your son comes of age,
She will make him a mighty khan like Katar.
Though the high, imposing coat stands ready,
When she comes, she will water his horse.
While ears can hear and eyes can see,
She will spread his fame among the people.
She is the blessing of the Night of Destiny,
A heavenly maiden created by God,
The one who will bring joy to the soul.
If your daughter-in-law Kuyaly remains well,
She will fulfill your heart’s desire.
The small, dark leather purses
She will fill with much gold,
Fulfilling all your wishes.
The heavy saddlebags and leather sacks
She will fill with goods of yellow gold.
Her heart will bring peace to the people;
Destroying many enemies,
You will see her become the foremost khan.
When your daughter-in-law Kuyaly comes,
A charger will be tied at your hitching rail,
And broad cauldrons will boil.
You will prosper in abundance
And flourish like luxuriant grass.
She is the one you must await,
The soul who will care for your hearth.
When she becomes your daughter-in-law,
Your charger will come to your throne,
And your falcon will be ready for training.
Your champion will bear a quiver,
And your stature will be like Mount Kap.
Will any mortal dare confront you?
Will an enemy dare attack head-on?
Will he covetously attempt
To strike from a cold mountain pass?
Will he cross the Barmak Mountains
And come striding bare-legged?
Your daughter-in-law a champion, your son a lion—
Can any threatening foe defeat them?
Her prowess is extraordinary,
Her days of glory will be many;
She is the generous bringer of good fortune,
The soul you must await,
The very embodiment of true prosperity,
The dark eye of blessed destiny.
When Kuyaly becomes your daughter-in-law,
You, fierce and imposing woman,
Will be the Night of Destiny to the city.
Sacred as mighty Mount Kap,
You will be a saint incarnate.
Consider and understand what I say;
Through the words I have spoken truly,
Good fortune will come to you.
Its collar will be fine and its tether golden;
A true falcon will alight upon your hand.
If it survives, the noble one
Will become entangled in your golden net
And one day fall into your hands.
Peerless will be your steed,
And your kinsmen will camp beside you.
Your enemies will leave your thoughts;
They will cling together like curds and befriend you,
Those enemies with whom you once shed blood,
And your wish will fall into your hands.’
So spoke the dervish,
Taking my hand and drawing me close.
While I lay sleeping in my dream,
He startled me with a sudden shove.
My snoring stopped,
And my eyes flew wide as scattered flour.
I swiftly awoke from my dream,
