But God has freed my hands!
I have come to dig your grave,
I have come to cut off your road!
Now I will bind your fortune,
I will tear your throne away!
I will tear down your roof-ring and level it,
I will turn spring into autumn before its time.
My fury has come; I will lay you flat,
I will hack your life away in pieces,
I will swallow your blood like kumis.
I will end your reign as khan,
I will crush and chew your liver.
You burned me before I could burn;
May you burn and become an ember like me,
Blazing and consumed by fire,
May you vanish as I nearly did.
May you see no daylight, but only night,
May you become charcoal, may you become ash.
You wronged me not once but a thousand times;
Swaggering and strutting,
Why did you stir up so much strife?
From the very beginning, warrior,
Ninety beasts were slaughtered for your feast,
And from the first, mighty Kanchoro,
You were given the name Kanchoro.
You became a brother born of one nest,
But at heart you became an enemy.
You ruined the country and destroyed the people,
You spilled blood and slaughtered the khan.
You plunged the old into misery,
You brought evil upon everyone.
As though the Kyrgyz and Argyn did not exist,
You drove them all away together,
Disdaining them, you put out their hearths.
You increased your levies;
Why did you make them suffer so?
You drowned your fold in blood,
You carried your cruelty beyond all bounds,
You concealed your true malice,
You spread your conflict throughout the land.
Stirring bitter turmoil and strife,
You let the Jediger raid us.
When my uncle Bölökbay was being struck down,
I ran about begging for his life.
I threw myself before the musket,
Pleading, “Dear brother-in-law!”
Heedless of my pleas for life,
You slaughtered all my people.
You raised a hell as high as a mountain;
At the entrance to the treasury,
At the mountain of Kayypchy,
On the slopes of Kan-Jaylak,
You massacred Bölökbay’s men.
The golden-cheeked battle-axe,
Grasping and brandishing it in my hand,
To Kyyaz, son of Bagysh,
You gave it away as booty.
You split my crown and rubbed in salt,
You slit my soles and put worms in them,
Clothed me in a coarse felt cloak,
And mounted me on a dun mare.
This wretched soul once untouched by harsh winds,
Came to yearn even for that felt cloak;
Whatever I touched became embers,
Whatever I ate became filth.
Captured, I sobbed bitterly,
Shrieking as I endured humiliation;
My days of happiness were few,
And wrathful Kyyaz became my foe.
The moonless night was dark;
For fourteen years I was a slave woman,
Gathering firewood and tending livestock.
We collapsed, then struggled upright,
And in that way we vanished.
Wailing and weeping, we were disgraced;
We grew up as orphans.
I shall bring my people down from the hills,
I shall take my revenge without being told.
You stripped off my robe as booty;
Now I shall perform a marvel,
