“O muraas inscribed upon my brow by fate,
All of you lion-hearted champions,
Have you seen what I have seen,
And learned what I have learned?
Yesterday, when I sent Akjoltoy ahead,
He was worth a host against the shooting foe.
Wearing out horses and surveying the land,
Loosing hounds and flying hunting birds,
My khan-uncle went out scouting;
It seems he camped briefly at the ford.
It seems his destined road lay there,
And that he knew well the path of campaigning.
It seems it was a tiger’s road;
My uncle was a true man, his spirit stirred,
And it seems countless paths opened before him.
Encountering the sacred Night of Power,
He found what he desired,
And my blessed uncle
Found a black-eyed beauty.
Will not the thoroughbreds turn their heads?
Will the warriors not ride without rest
Until they reach my blessed uncle?”
Thus spoke Seytek the panther:
“Today let us cross a month’s journey,
And loosen the reins of our horses.
Let the cherished thoroughbreds’
Rumps ripple like those of wild rams,
And their backs straighten like argali.
Let the dust rise and divide the sky;
Today let their pedigree be revealed.
Let this restless heart be calmed,
And the thoroughbreds’ eyes be opened.
Let the black stones struck by their hooves
Fly apart like sparks from flint.
Let the ringing beneath their feet
Shoot into the sky like arrows.
I burn with wrath and long to see her;
Akbermet is the one I desire.
I lose all peace and yearn to see her;
Akbermet is the one I seek.
My young living heart is torn apart,
And one night seems like a thousand to me.
The reason she is about to appear is this:
Stricken by the pain she chose to face,
I heard that Akbermet is coming.
My dear uncle,
I heard this news from Akjoltoy.
I heard she scattered all her countless riches
And left them behind
To the fairy who served her.
I heard she gathered a company of fairies
And, leaving her ruined realm,
Is leading them here.
I heard her words remained:
She lamented and cried,
‘Oh, Seytek!’ in bitter longing.
I heard she burned her champion in the flames,
While she herself remained.
I heard she arrayed
Her gold and precious jewels.
I heard Akbermet voiced her sorrow,
Lamenting to God,
And saying, ‘Seytek, my betrothed,’
Set out to search for me.
I heard the unfortunate queen
Was reduced to misery.
I heard that for Seytek
Her dear head languished in yearning.
She set forth upon a journey,
Crossing many deserts along the way,
Passing frozen, looming mountains,
And descending through deep ravines,
Crying out in anguish to the Creator.
‘We have seen what we longed to see while still alive,’ she says,
‘The one I desired has come,’ she says.
I am dying in the flames of love,
And my thoughts scatter in countless directions.
For that unfortunate one who has suffered,
For the beloved daughter of the fairies,
My dear lions,
