Before anyone could say a word,
In the blink of an eye,
A pale-gray banner rose,
And an ever-mounting uproar broke out.
They had the look of Kyrgyz,
And when they joined battle,
A fury that simply overwhelmed all.
Their white standard became their banner,
Their white-and-mottled pennant fluttered.
A roar split the heavens,
Their war cries deafened the ears,
Dust flew into the sky,
The army seethed amid clouds of dust,
Dividing into many formations,
The vast host spread out in splendor,
Appearing like ravening beasts,
A blue haze flooded the land,
The earth was covered by spear-bearing men,
Too many for the eye to encompass,
Like tumbleweed driven by the wind,
Their identity could not be discerned,
Countless surging troops roared.
When they listened to the tumult,
When they learned what the uproar meant,
Ahead there was shouting,
The people surged and the host clamored,
Crying “Kyyaz!” as their battle cry,
Sword tips flashed separately,
Spears appeared as thick as fish bones.
It seemed they had been roused to frenzy—
The countless host of Kyyaz
Of the Jediger, bending the earth.
In a myriad-strong army no one stands apart;
Among those countless troops brought forth,
What kinds were there, and what kinds were not?
Within those forces,
When a black musket cracked,
Some would flee until they died;
When a short musket snapped,
Some would start and fall from their horses.
Some would behold the enemy’s courage,
Cry, “Hero, we submit!”
And dismount to surrender.
Their eyes bulging and blazing,
Speechless while misery boiled within,
There were many who merely watched;
There were even more who, at a shout,
Fell from their horses and died.
“Take my horse and coat as spoil—
Only let me live!” they would say,
Clambering stiffly down from the saddle,
Standing helpless once captured;
There were many who surrendered so.
Among the Jediger’s vast host
There were also cowards
Who dared not step outdoors at night;
There were also bunglers
Who swung their battle-axes wide;
When a spear was thrust, they cried out—
There were also men quick to panic;
And if they found the chance,
There were also men who fled to their villages.
There were loud, blustering braggarts,
Swaggerers among them too;
There were also mighty wrestlers,
Most skillful in the stratagems of war;
There were also men who plunged
All who approached into disaster;
Untroubled by the prospect of death,
Looking neither up nor down,
Never thinking they might die,
There were also men who came alongside
And seized foes by the collar;
And there were men who cast others
Into dreadful calamity.
The renowned stood at the front,
The heroes guarded the flanks,
The whip-bearers were at the front,
