To plunder all her countless wealth
And carry it away as spoils,
Beginning with Kanykey,
And cast Aychürök into misery again,
Slaughtering many as they went,
Kanchoro and Kyyaz at their head,
They now surged into the palace.
The dream she had seen seemed to be coming true;
Had such a thing ever happened before?
The father and forefathers
Of the magnanimous leopard-born hero
Had never witnessed, behold,
A calamity like this.
Kanchoro crowded against one side of the palace
And thrust forward his spear;
Brave Kyyaz came around the qibla side
And stood there hemming it in.
Every living soul cried out;
All the black-clad Jediger,
Shouting “Kanchoro! Kyyaz!”
Closed in and entered the palace.
Poor Aychürök, the woman—
There was no end to her widow’s grief.
If seven khans’ black foes had come,
He would have charged in, coat flying loose,
Raised a mighty battle cry,
And torn her free from them;
But skillful Külchoro was not there.
There was no champion girded for action,
No refuge in which to fortify themselves,
No renowned lion of a noble hero.
What is here today is gone tomorrow—
Such filth this world proves to be!
The black roan with the scanty mane,
Whom he used to mount for holy war,
That honored swift steed was gone;
The kinsman he had led and made a hero,
Whom he had made equal to his own son—
There was no brother left,
Save the wretch Kanchoro.
From the iron-gated stronghold
The Jediger ran shouting;
That puffed-up lion Kanchoro
Showed the look of an enemy.
Here is how it became plain:
He drew his bow like pouring rain,
That wretch shot arrows like hail.
Then see the rain, see the arrows!
Into the white palace,
See the arrows strike in showers;
See the embers burning through the haze;
See the arrows strike without breaking!
Still unbroken, shouting, they surged forward—
See the host that flooded in!
Aychürök’s tower—
Do not ask what befell the tower.
Her face changed, her heart burned;
Your distraught sister-in-law could not stay still.
She wished to die, yet could not die;
Alas, she could not take her own life!
Aychürök wept in bitter resentment:
“My black eyes have gone blind;
Surely God has struck my wretched bloodline.
My cherished younger brother Külchoro—
Surely God has struck down my protector.
Yesterday, when I told him to stop, he would not listen;
When he braced himself with courage,
When I warned him what would happen, he would not listen.
When he whipped and beat
Me, the wretched woman—
Curse this womanhood of mine!—
And I shrieked and cursed him,
Did my curse strike true?
Has what I said truly come to pass?
Has God punished me beyond all others?
Wishing that my curse would fall into water,
I spat into black water;
