The hero’s son Seytek.
To see his father’s face,
His fitting words came too late,
His two eyes strained into four,
Burning, seething, surging,
To his father, the bloodthirsty prince,
Noble Seytek pleaded.
If he wished his people well,
Seytek, who had remained behind,
Looked upon Semetey:
His beard was like an arrow case,
And when he looked at his mustache,
It was like the blade of an ornate sheath.
The breath that issued from his mouth
Was like a flame that ravaged a valley.
His lashes were flame, his eyes were embers;
No man possessed such fearful power.
His ferocity and lionheartedness
Surpassed the whole wide world.
My father the khan’s valor—
His face was dark, his speech fierce,
His courage unmatched, his wrath ablaze.
My leopard father was like a lion;
There is no such mortal in the world.
His round ears were like shields,
His great eyes like the Morning Star,
His aquiline nose like a mountain ridge,
The breath that issued from his mouth
Was like the wind through a palace gorge.
Whoever roused his anger,
He seemed able to devour with all his age.
Of middle height and broad of shoulder,
He bristled with boundless valor,
Like a black-mottled leopard
Rearing up beside him.
Like a short-maned gray lion
About to tear open a wound,
He made ready on every side.
A towering black camel of singular form
Pressed forward behind him.
The blessed child you bore in your womb—
You have subjected him to every trial;
The wife lovely as the promised moon,
The wise one cherished by all,
You have left a widow all these years.
Your chosen mount is the black-bay steed;
Behind you the black-faced woman laments.
From this moment take the grief-stricken woman
And bear her away at your saddle bow.
May fortune favor this fleeting world,
So we may share the ordained burden,
So we may meet and lie together,
So we may melt and know each other’s secrets,
So we may unite and journey together.
Take your poor wretch with you;
Keep me ruling in your heart,
Though you travel far on many journeys.
Gray-maned prince and leopard,
Bear me away at your saddle bow.
All my many kinds of dresses,
Though I heap them up, will not reach my neck;
Do not leave this hapless head in want,
But take me into your embrace.”
So saying, she wailed aloud,
And Aichürök sobbed and wept;
Every living soul melted,
All the sorrowful met that day,
All the dear ones sobbed,
And all who remained cried out.
The ancient cavern and the curved cliffs seemed to melt,
As parents and child were reunited.
The Black Giant and Külchoro,
And all the warriors, grew excited;
All those burdened by sorrow
Met the hero upon the open plain,
And stood there overwhelmed.
Before he had finished speaking,
The people’s thoughts were divided;
See what such a parting was like—
He had gone and encountered,
