The knot at the heart of profound words,
The sovereign who bound them all together,
At their head, this pure one,
The deep pool of a flowing river,
The great man of the white-capped people,
You shall withdraw from his side,
If he places hope in his livestock,
Tell him to submit to the words thus spoken.
Without stirring up a quarrel,
Without shouting or slaughtering one another,
Without arguing or fighting,
Without resisting even the lesser levy,
Without making such a commotion,
Tell him therefore to submit to the spoken word.
Without deviating a hair from that command,
Tell him to give it to Khan Tengir.
Tell him he will see a mighty conflict.
Let him rage if an army comes,
Upon the pass at his waist,
While the warrior is in your hands,
Let skill reach his neck,
Let him not think himself our equal,
Blood broth will spill into his breast,
What else but ruin will befall him?
Certain death will come upon him,
There are many words to go on speaking,
The words are exhausted; the matter is settled.
The dawn of words spoken truly,
The foremost of the renowned lions,
With five days as the appointed time.
I have fallen in love with Zhalzhal,
Come and soothe my burning heart.
Do not fear; come with your eyes open.
If you prove equal to what I have said,
For the sake of the light, Zhelzhetpes,
I will defend the word that was spoken,
I will give you whatever you desire.
I will send word to the people,
I will bless the people of the forty khans,
As one khan among them, you,
I will raise and acclaim as khan.
Among the black Kalmyks and Manchus,
I will have you rule among them,
If you prove worthy of the words spoken,
I will place a golden crown upon you.
I will make this Beijing acknowledge you,
I will settle in Beijing,
Its two daughters and one true one,
Let Zhelzhetpes keep coming.
The assembly of the khagan's people,
Zhelzhetpes became a great lord,
Saying the hero had risen above the rest,
Saying Zhelzhetpes had become a pasha,
The people stirred among themselves.
As he stood speaking his words,
As he fully explained himself,
Of the mighty Padishah Tengir,
Saying all his deeds were pure,
Calling him a sovereign surpassing the world,
