The wide world became narrow;
He longed even for enough saliva
To swallow once and sustain his life.
Külchoro, who had scorned even rich mutton,
Was in a wretched state to behold.
His joints loosened, his insides burned;
His strength failed and his eyes blazed.
He could not cross toward Küdür;
Over the lower slopes of Üch-Koshoy
The warrior could not pass, though he wailed.
Through Kara-Buura and Chatkal,
Through dark, lofty marshlands,
Your warrior could not make his way,
Nor could he reach that well-known place.
The soles of his feet were torn open;
His two legs, a warrior’s support,
Were flayed and failed beneath him.
The thick flesh of his heels,
Striking the stones, was worn away.
At Jalg yz-Terek and Chuk-Terek,
In the hollow of ridged Besh-Tash,
Along the Kan-Jayloo,
Amid rugged, marshy hills,
Where dense honeysuckle grew below,
Was Kök-Üngkür among the blue honeysuckle.
When he scattered his vast wealth,
And yesterday the poor lame smith
Fled there in misery,
This had been his place of refuge.
By the spring at Chybyrluu, flowing for a thousand years,
Was the Cave of Khan Bakay,
Where many people had gathered since ancient times.
Külchoro reached Kara-Üngkür
And fled inside, exhausted,
Helpless and drained of blood.
His strength failed and his eyes burned;
No part of his body remained whole.
Dark blood streamed from him
As he sheltered in Kara-Üngkür.
The world he saw became narrow;
Külchoro, who never lay idle in the horde,
Now lay helpless in that cave.
Having fled inside the cave,
He propped himself on his elbows and rested,
Dozing briefly and finding sleep.
He lay on his side and let his spirit recover,
Sleeping until his need was satisfied.
Then Külchoro said:
“I was a shapely gray ridge
No man or mighty enemy could cross;
I was a pale-gray mountain pass.
I was a pale-gray falcon
From which no bustard escaped.
Blazing and glowing like fire,
I used to carve up game and eat it.
While my lionhearted uncle lived,
I used to say, ‘What calamity could touch me?’
Now my whole body is wounded;
My hero is gone from over my head,
And I am left in mourning.
Bullets have torn my shoulder apart,
And the foe has defiled my person.
Kara-Üngkür, holy shrine of the seer,
Hear my sorrowful words;
Let your sacred power increase.
Father Kara-Üngkür, hide me.
Shelter this wretch who seeks refuge today;
Father Kara-Üngkür, hide me.
Today I was a lion, a gray-maned hero;
If you are my blessing, Kara-Üngkür,
Today I look to you for protection.
If you are my guardian, Kara-Üngkür,
Clasp me tightly to your breast;
Nurse and restore me, Kara-Üngkür.
Be a father to me today
And keep me safe, Kara-Üngkür.
Be a shelter today
For this poor, forsaken soul, Kara-Üngkür.
