My tiny soul shrieked like a fly,
My fragile life was terrified,
And I prayed to the true God.
The fire of love blazed within me,
Burning not only my flesh but my bones.
Marveling at his beauty,
I yearned for my gray-maned hero;
As I sat gazing upon his splendor,
I watched him in astonishment,
And longed at the sight of his figure.
What I had called early had become late;
In my longing to reach hero Seytek,
My two eyes became four from watching.
Broad-chested and radiant-faced,
His bearing surpassed every living soul;
He seemed to have been created
In a form unlike that of ordinary men.
He himself was eighteen years old,
And valor shone foremost in his appearance.
A golden girdle encircled him,
Light played across his moonlike face,
And he stood grim, without a smile.
The sight of him stirred the heart,
And to my eyes he seemed my destined inheritance.
If he should suddenly surge in wrath,
No mountain could withstand him.
Entrusting himself to Allah alone,
No mortal could come near him.
The sight of him stirred my heart:
‘This is the equal meant to join with me.’
So I implored God,
With tears pouring from my eyes,
Counting my sorrows one by one.
My fleshly heart trembled;
In my dream I saw such a man
And scarcely a spoonful of blood remained in me.
My strength was utterly exhausted
When I looked again upon his form.
My heart surged and was overwhelmed;
His beauty surpassed all living beings,
And appeared above the lofty blue mountains.
He seemed to be the pillar
Supporting the heavens and the blue sky.
He seemed to embody
Both your moon and your sun.
He seemed to have been born
From the throat of this gaping gorge,
To drive the whole world before him
And stand behind it as its protector.
Marveling at all I saw,
I pleaded and lamented to God,
‘God, grant him to me as my lord,’
Praying in restless yearning.
While I lay sleeping in my dream,
Consumed by the fire of love,
As I stood there in amazement,
Four men came beside me.
When I asked who the four were,
One was Khidr and one was Fortune,
One was Prosperity and one was Wisdom,
Standing before my face.
‘You were a princess and sovereign of the fairies;
This is your ordained match,’ they said.
‘May God make him yours forever,
Your gray-maned husband who opens the gates of fortune,’ they said.
Then suddenly they brought
The dark gray-maned Seytek.
They drew the marriage curtain and recited the wedding rite,
And placed the young man in my hands.
My blessing on that sacred night!
My heart burned and my blood boiled,
My spirit surged and my eyes shone,
And I lay upon the narrow bed.
The delights of this world
I experienced on that very night.
‘What is your battle cry and lineage?’
I asked him eagerly.
When I questioned him, he answered,
Telling me many things:
‘My grandfather is the hero Manas,’ he said,
