Our dear Kyrgyz were our people.
You fired your guns with thunderous cracks—
My dear people, do as you will.
Our backs have turned against one another;
Alas, our people have become corrupt.
Our nature has utterly changed;
The Kyrgyz people are ruined.
They are not an enemy from the Chinese khagan,
Yet, doing worse than the Chinese,
Our hearts have turned against each other.
The lion died and our strength departed;
All fortune and prosperity vanished.
From Jylgyn, Keng-Kol, and Talas,
The yellow-ridged passes were lost.
Semetey, defender of the people—
My lionhearted uncle departed from the Kyrgyz.
Wandering in grief,
Parted from my khan and lion of an uncle,
My two eyes dart about,
My two legs hang limp.
My strength exhausted, my vigor gone,
Dark blood drains from my body.
The face of the world has turned to snow;
My courage fails and my heart burns.
My bones gone slack, I cannot walk;
There is no hollow where I may hide.
My poor soul burns and feels confined;
I find no pass by which to flee,
No refuge where I may shelter—
Such torment Külchoro endured.
Clouds covered the sky;
Sixty calamities came at once.
He limped along, sparing himself,
Leaning upon his father’s legacy,
The long matchlock rifle.
Early prophecies had come true too late;
Eager to end his wretched life,
His eyes stared wide.
He sobbed, crying, “My uncle!”
And, “My forefather Manas, long departed!”
While your beloved one stood thus,
If only you had mounted Buurul and made him rear,
Spurring him into a frenzy,
Raging like a mountain torrent,
With the bearing of a mountain lion,
Dark-backed and blue-flanked—
If only my lionhearted uncle
Had watched while the Jediger pressed me,
While they inflicted this disgrace,
While my dear uncle looked on,
Then let the vast black host of Jediger
Have tried to shame me so!
Mounted on the horse Aisarala,
Carrying a spear without a tassel,
Calmly filled with fury,
A scabbardless sword at his waist,
Saying, “I shall stand beside the lone warrior,”
If only my lion father Almambet, gone to eternity,
Had stood watching!
Then let the vast black host of Jediger
Have aimed their hatred and fired,
And tried their tyranny!
He seemed as vast as the blue sky;
Not only men, but even beasts
Were shaken at the sight of him.
His quiver was like the back of a rhinoceros,
Its weight enough to crush a soul.
Throwing the whole world into alarm,
He made the Kula horse beneath him
Stride proudly.
He leveled his Akkelte,
And felled every enemy he met.
He loaded ammunition upon the packhorse;
When he came in wrath,
He swept away the Chinese khagan’s hosts.
None who faced him defeated him;
None who fought him escaped death.
Of singular form and terrible venom,
