She galled every one of their steeds,
And grievously wounded their hearts;
She made a slave of the sovereign’s head,
And treated his silken life like wool,
Scattering his thoughts in countless directions.
Her love was plain to see;
She parted from her city’s people,
And from the city of the peri folk
Set out upon this momentous quest.
The serene, ill-fated maiden,
Seeking a lordly lion of a man—
Such is the way of a devoted woman—
Abandoned all her worldly wealth.
She flew in search of the land of Talas,
And unashamedly sought the hero Seytek.
She let her rosy face grow wan,
And humbled her royal head;
Her heart was torn in many directions,
As the fire of love swept her away
And tears poured from her eyes.
She set forth in warrior fashion,
Returning toward the land of your childhood.
In a dream she had seen the hero Seytek,
Whose majesty could set the world ablaze;
She had seen the fierce leopard-gray-wolf hero.
She heard tidings from the old man Kydyr,
And learned that the land where your cord was cut and your swaddling washed
Was called Talas.
“That is the land where he pitched his white palace;
If you would find joy, that hero is Seytek”—
Thus she heard the tidings.
She gathered guides who knew the roads
And envoys who could mediate,
That hapless maiden gathering them all;
Riding the clouds and scattering frost,
She crossed toward us over Mount Kap,
Where no living soul had ever trodden.
She encountered sorcerers
And monstrous ogres on the way,
And scattered all her wealth.
Because of you, peerless Seytek,
This merchant of the world
Hastily abandoned everything.
Because of you, O leopard,
From burning in the fire of love,
Only a spoonful of blood remains in her,
And her flesh is but a pale pulp.
Warrior Seytek, O leopard,
Know that she is deeply in love with you.
Her tiny soul cries out,
And she sobs in earnest;
Unable to reach you,
She is passing through a living death.
All the torments of this world
That hapless maiden now
Is enduring in these very days.
Therefore, Seytek,
Let us tire our horses and survey the land,
And ride out to meet her;
This year let us soothe her burning grief
And open the flower market of joy.
Let us ease the deep sorrow
Of Bermet, daughter of the peri.
Let ninety animals be slaughtered for her feast,
And let her name be proclaimed as Bermet.
Her spirit is exalted and her fame is great;
Look closely—she is a mighty blessing.
Among all humankind
No beauty like Bermet can be found.
My falcon blessed by Kydyr,
Every hardship has now been overcome;
Do not resist—heed my words.
Let us weary our horses over the distant road
And ride out to meet
The hapless peri-born maiden.
Let your valor become known;
Let the jealous foe rejoice bitterly at the news,
‘A peri bride has come to him!’
Quickly invoke Baabedin,
And in the name of your fierce father,
