She gave you tea when you thirsted,
Listened freely to your words,
Cosseted you,
Hung necklaces around your neck,
Draped brocade over your back,
And, lest the sun’s heat touch you,
Had you tended in a shady place,
Entrusted you to attendants,
And had the chief wife praise you.
Did she not regard you as a nephew
And graciously listen to your words?
She listened to your fitting words as a daughter-in-law,
And regarded you as her own mother.
Yet you let your tongue run wild,
Incited your Kanchoro,
And destroyed your bloodthirsty lord.
You steeped your churn in poison,
And thus brought about your own end!
You placed sixty treasuries of jewelers
In Kanchoro’s hands;
You made Kanchoro destroy
The sixty Kalmyks, Bölökbay,
And Davut, master of the treasury.
You imposed punishment upon me
And had strips of hide cut from my back;
Into the palace where no cold-hearted man might enter,
You admitted Kanchoro.
You shook the Kyrgyz and made them your subjects,
And made heroes of whomever you chose.
Woman, if you understand, it was you
Who caused this monstrous revolt and great conflict.
You are an infuriated infidel,
An evil, witch-like infidel!
You utterly ended my laughter,
And scattered all my possessions;
You made my words mere meadow grass
And devastated my people.
Incorrigible shrew, you will never prosper;
Though you came here a wanderer, you bluster
And will not curb your pride.
May you and your husband be as one!
How you have enraged me,
And driven my spirit into grief;
Calling me a degenerate son of China,
You showed me filth to the very end.
My anger rises and I bristle;
Today I will surely fall upon one of you!
We were kin, yet you would not act as kin;
Regarding me as an enemy,
You had your troops close around me.
Pouring out your wrath and roaring,
You wicked woman remained incorrigible.
My fury has risen—you will die;
Today, accursed woman, you will see
The true place whence none return!
When I rise in wrath,
You will surely die today.
I have looked you full in the face,
Restless, vicious shrew;
Why have you provoked my anger?
Whom did I command to yield the throne?
Shall I strike away completely
That groundless rage of yours?
I called you kin, but you will not be kin;
You rage and will not mend your ways,
Forever hurling words at me.
When I regard you as my mother,
Why do you seek a quarrel?
From time to time,
You always begin yapping.
You make me shoot at you as an enemy
And plunge me into torment.
You roar and work yourself into a frenzy,
You shriek and speak outrageously.
You are an enemy openly revealed,
The black eye at the heart of conflict,
A clamoring, shrieking menace,
A shameless creature with tireless jaws.
When my heroic brother indulged me,
He gave me butter when I hungered,
