We shattered them and took revenge.
We broke Altai and seized its valleys.
We routed the caravaners and took their tea.
While my lion-hearted uncle lived,
We hardened ourselves, sated with blood.
Throughout the world we were named “bloodthirsty.”
If told to take a cap, we cut off a head;
If told to drink water, we drank poison;
If told to spill blood, we spilled our fury.
We covered the valley’s waters with fat.
When together we struck the vengeful foe,
We laid even our own fathers low.
When we were driven into utter fury,
Khan Manas’s forty choros—
Not forty warriors, but forty companions,
Each of the forty had a different way,
All forty were famed champions who shattered the age.
Their horses grew fat and battle-ready;
Gathering around Manas,
They became renowned as the Forty.
When a lord thrust a spear, they flew like bullets;
When they attacked, they destroyed lives.
We slew the forty choros;
We did it because of what they themselves had done.
They spared no life, however one pleaded,
Those forty choros who attacked as one,
Whose knives were ever ready to slaughter.
Those forty choros went forth prepared,
And when they enraged us bitterly,
We destroyed the forty nobles
And made their women and girls weep.
From the forty courts of the forty choros,
We swept like wind and seized the ridge,
And wrought a mighty slaughter.
When they truly provoked our wrath,
We overthrew Abyke,
Sent Köbösh to the grave,
And showed every accursed enemy
The valor of gray wolves.
We anointed the white steel with blood.
Now tell the truth of your dire ordeals!
Tell of the saddlecloth you rode forth upon,
Tell of the valor that routed that host!”
When Seytek pressed him thus,
How could Choro remain silent?
If Külchoro refused to speak,
Could there ever be another like him?
“Fatherless brave Seytek, my son,
You would have me sing my song;
You would have me recount my scars.
You would have me begin the siege,
Hero, you would have me intensify the calamity.
You would hear my words,
Hero, you would have me vent my spirit!
You have brought this sorrow-laden head
To a halt at Kapka-Tash;
Why awaken the madness of long ago?
If I speak of my former days,
My son Seytek, wait a while,
For it may sound as if I boast.
If I speak of what lies ahead,
It may sound as though I am exulting.
Thinking on so many dire troubles,
I may seem carried away.
While my gray-wolf hero lived,
We broke through Kapchal and opened a road.
Without gathering people or mustering troops,
We attacked the Khagan’s China
And raided Beijing, taking horses.
Red gold and ruby stones,
Precious jewels we took.
From the long-legged Chinese we took artisans,
And we took surpassingly beautiful girls.
We stormed and shattered them and took their herds.
Cotton sashes and broad boots,
The great lord, khan of the monks—
We captured a khan named Eskara.
We broke Kyyas and captured the caravan.
With battle cries we fought for six months,
Against the swarming Chinese—
