It is also true that I am his son.
It is also true that I am the fierce one
Who overturned peoples and founded a realm.
It is also true that I was the mountain refuge
Of rolling Talas and great Chatkal.
It is also true that I am the lion
Who strips the life from any he meets.
Did I not pound the valley into dust?
When caught in a blood feud,
I laid even my own father in the grave;
When spears were leveled straight at me,
When one like you inflamed and scorched my soul,
I warred even against my kin.
I am conflict itself,
The black eye of rebellion!
To kin I am a golden banner,
To foes the roar of battle!
When anger makes me bristle,
I am fury itself;
I too am the black eye of conflict!
I ravaged his pastures and rendered them fat;
Hero Kyyaz, whom you desired—
I cut off his head and laid him low.
Bristling in my rage,
In the Seven Valleys I seized
The migration lands of the Jediger,
And took my revenge.
I extinguished the fire they had kindled
And drove them all away;
I felled their banner and raised an uproar,
And took Kyyaz Khan himself.
Slaughtering his people without sparing one,
I struck terror into their beys
And took my revenge by hemming them in.
When one comes to you calling you kin,
You twist his neck like an enemy;
Whenever I come, you shriek
And turn to bite my calf.
You grow ever more insolent;
May you and your husband be as one!”
As though you would rule everyone,
As though you would swallow the whole world,
You bristle when angered,
As though you would slaughter them all.
Your face blackens and darkens,
You cluck and rant in frenzy,
And still you stand there ranting.
Has your honored father Shaatemir—
Has your father Shaatemir died?
Have the people wailed and the nation cried out?
Has someone buried your father?!
When your slave comes pleading, calling you kin
And bearing no grudge,
You rage and threaten;
When your servant comes, you change your face
And rave as though your mother’s kin
Had all been massacred.
Before, you spoiled my temper;
You roused in me a rage no cudgel could quell.
Without cause you spoiled my temper,
Tormented every spoonful of my blood,
And made my whole soul boil!
Why did you come shouting and raging
To speak such cutting words?
Has some great slaughter befallen you?
Why did you provoke my wrath?
You are only a woman, yet you worked yourself up;
Had I left you to your own devices,
You raged as though you would devour me.
You shouted in anger,
And before even your husband, woman,
You summoned your executioners.
You fouled your tongue and made it a sheath,
Raised a clamor and started strife,
Calling me a fugitive son of the khagan,
A flesh-born slave of the bloodthirsty one;
You drive my blood from its course,
Shrieking your ceaseless abuse,
And thus bring about my end.
Of the fugitive who came from the khagan’s realm—
