If anyone could strike a warrior, it was you;
Your fame has remained with me.
Ah, Külchoro, my foal,
Say, “These are my uncle’s words,”
And tell them to Ümötöy.
If he brings calamity upon the Kazakhs,
Convey my greetings and blessing!”
So saying, Semetey
Fired and sharpened his companion’s spirit,
Strengthened him, and sent him on his way.
The lion companion flew like an arrow,
The valiant companion like a naked blade,
To the banks of Üch-Koshoy,
And the lowlands of great Keng-Kol.
Külchoro galloped there
And reached the appointed place.
Seeing the companion, Ümötöy
Took his steel spear in hand,
Struck Kulaker once on the flank,
And made him pound hollows into the earth;
With matchless agility,
He sent him racing at full speed,
And came up to the companion.
When valiant Ümötöy approached,
The noble companion made ready like a trained falcon;
The splendid hero’s brave companion
Found wisdom as though from the unseen.
Speaking softly but with firm resolve,
With matchless tact,
Külchoro began to speak
And went before Ümötöy:
“Ümötöy, my cousin through our mothers,
You have come because reedy Keng-Kol and broad Talas
Seemed fine lands to you.
You have come because the precious people
Of the forty Kyrgyz tribes seemed a nation worth having.
You have come because Semetey, son of Manas,
The heroic, fierce-wolf sultan,
Seemed their mainstay.
Do not seethe and work yourself up;
Cast aside your vicious intent,
And form a new purpose.
Offer the sultan wise counsel,
And, whether it brings sin or merit,
Take upon yourself the duty
Of Kazakh and Kyrgyz alike.
As for the aged lion Bakay,
My hero, we mean to grant you
Everything you have requested.
Ümötöy, cousin through our mothers,
If you are sane and not mad,
If you are a warrior and not an enemy,
You have become a fortress before the champions.
If you listen to reason, Ümötöy,
You shall become this year a mighty hero and lord,
Not only among the Kyrgyz but throughout the world.
In the lowlands of Jylgynduu,
On the banks of broad Talas,
In place of the hero Köksö,
You whose tidings are mighty and name renowned,
We intend to make you khan.
Throughout all lands
Seen by eyes and heard of by ears,
We intend to make you khan.
We shall proclaim,
‘Ümötöy has become exalted,’
And make you lord
Over all the prosperous people.
Willingly accept the khanship;
Go before my uncle, the bloodthirsty khan,
And say that you are his kinsman.
Here is a head to take, and here is the land;
Hero, if you would take a head, here am I.
If you receive them well, here are the willing Kyrgyz
And their whole nation!
If you turn violent, here am I,
The noble companion who will take your head!
Put all your resentment aside;
