I shall subdue their noble people,
And slaughter their proud nation.”
Their heads were ensnared in suffering;
Eighty champions and eighty companies,
And multitudes came out to clash.
They had wrestlers and warriors,
And Sarybay stood among them;
They had champions and lions,
Lions who had thrown the whole world into turmoil.
Blustering with swollen lungs,
Their arrogant breasts pounding,
Sarybay attacked.
Heroes fell and khans died;
Through the wretched villain’s great savagery,
All who faced him perished.
Sarybay himself was wounded,
And many others came to grief.
It became a great and dreadful calamity,
A deafening uproar.
This was the maiden’s battle;
She fell into death-dealing hands.
Sarybay, son of the monster,
Had his head split seven times,
And was stabbed through seven layers.
Clouds gathered in the sky;
He raged madly as he neared death—
Such was his measure when beheld.
They entered a grievous conflict,
Fighting through summer and winter,
Wrestling and accusing each other,
Passing their days in spear combat.
Fierce in wrath was Sarybay;
Kuyaly, daughter of Kayypchal,
Showed such prowess as a wrestler.
With the warrior son of the monster,
With the lion who greased the earth with blood,
She grappled like a white snake,
And they mauled each other like ravenous stallion camels.
They had struggled against each other before;
When the infidel son of the monster
Was still young, she had encountered him.
She wrecked his camp and seized his plunder,
Slaughtered his khan and left him sprawled,
And waged a terrible battle.
She had slaughtered his people,
And divided his treasury.
She wiped out those who wore braids,
And enslaved all she encountered;
She reduced the topknotted to ashes,
And whenever enemies came to fight,
She hunted them down and destroyed them.
She threw down those lacking sense,
And many times before had made the swine
Suffer torment at her hands.
Against the hero Sarybay,
She followed close upon his yellow trail,
And stretched him out like one struck by wasting sickness.
Driving the charging warriors before her,
Kuyaly, daughter of Kayypchal,
Raged onward upon Jeljetpes;
She donned her armor for war,
Her companions swelling into a mighty host,
And whoever approached was struck down.
Blood flowed from her grappling,
And dust rose wherever she challenged.
Early words became late deeds;
Her two eyes seemed to become four.
On an earlier occasion,
When they had met face-to-face,
And gone forth to raise battle,
They stood pummeling each other,
Until they came to binding hands.
She had inflicted utter calamity
Upon Sarybay.
She bound the strong arms of
Sarybay’s countless host and blocked their open road;
Around that infidel Sarybay,
She cast a ring about his feet,
Waging a daylong battle for his blood,
Striking once more at his life.
