Holding it at a slant,
He filled its field of view;
Holding it steadily,
He satisfied his heart.
Now he saw the city
Of that same Khan Akun,
And now he saw all the different kinds
Of people living there.
They displayed surpassing finery,
And loaded their burdens upon camels;
It was a populous garden-land traveled by caravans,
And its people were somewhat haughty.
They were a people resembling the Sarts,
And their name, he learned, was Afghan.
Their trouser cuffs hung loose,
And they wore striped trousers;
At precisely sixty saddle-straps
Their knives had sheaths.
Their shirts lay open upon bare chests;
They were hook-nosed and dark-eyed.
There were people of countless forms;
If you looked closely, Afghanistan
Possessed a beauty all its own.
Even in the scorching height of summer
They wore black hats broad as cauldrons.
They had donkeys, mules, and horses,
And champions of many different kinds;
In plain robes and dark-eyed,
They had a population of countless kinds.
The khan of that Afghanistan
Was a man endowed with sacred power,
The vigorous elder Akun.
The city spread outward in cornered districts,
Its distant limits sharpened beneath the haze.
Afghanistan was a considerable city;
When he properly trained the spyglass upon it,
He saw that it held such a population.
There in the land of Afghanistan
Were mullahs wearing white turbans;
Such was the account of them.
There were khojas in striped robes,
A populace and a khan,
And living souls of countless kinds.
Akun lacked nothing he desired;
Guarding his treasury
Stood black wrestlers in ordered ranks.
The wrestlers had a curious appearance:
Trimmed beards and hairpieces;
Strange indeed were these people.
They spoke a halting, broken tongue,
And followed the Muslim faith.
Swaggering like black stallions,
The people of Afghanistan
Had a weakness for watching women.
Raised in arms without seeing a cradle,
They had long heads shaped like mortars.
They had costly food
Of red currants and raisins.
Their name, he learned, was Afghan;
They were a rather feeble people.
Long ago, when my khan-father Manas lived,
He raided them and took plunder,
Taking elephants among the spoils,
And loading the elephants with gold coins;
He took a thousand dark-eyed women.
To raid them had been fitting,
For it was a rather feeble land;
What they said was true:
Its women were beauties indeed.
If we should become enemies,
And charge into battle,
If they came against us head-on,
We could slaughter them all.
If Kanchoro's wrath were roused,
He could bind and capture their khans.
Baitaylak, man of Khan Bakay,
Could take all of them as plunder;
And Kalyk, man of Sarykan,
