Broke down and toppled the palace,
And utterly slaughtered
Every last guard.
If Chürök talked back,
They had devised a way to deal with her;
If she unexpectedly resisted,
If she chanced to answer back,
They would seize her and cut off her head,
Drag her along the road,
And hand her over to the Danggyt,
Gouge out both her eyes,
And if the wretch grew defiant,
Destroy and slaughter her—
Such was the Jediger’s intent.
Upon Chürök, the sunlike woman,
They brought anguish and calamity;
Upon Chürök, the moonlike woman,
They inflicted brutal oppression,
And plunged her into numbing misery.
On this side of Chürök
Stood black-hearted men,
Wrestlers crowding all around her.
When told to take a cap, they cut off a head—
Violent men surpassing ordinary mortals.
Looking to the other side,
There stood men in yellow rawhide trousers,
Each one able to face countless foes,
Their quivers bound and arrows counted,
Wrath blazing upon their faces
As though they would slaughter once again.
Looking upon this side,
They held spears without tassels,
Gripping the shafts greedily,
And thrusting them high aloft;
When battle was joined,
They never fearfully exposed their flanks.
When they moved, no living soul endured;
Whoever appeared before them
They crushed into earth as soft as felt.
Brandishing their spears,
Another band entered.
When she saw those wrestlers,
Your sister-in-law nearly died on the spot.
The valiant woman withered to a shadow,
As the many wrestlers bore down;
The crowd of wrestlers pressed mercilessly,
And when your sunlike, fierce sister-in-law
Suffered this guilty torment,
Her ribs felt torn apart,
Tears poured from her eyes,
And her heart was bitterly divided.
From shame she longed to die,
But the wretched woman could not,
For there was a child in her womb.
From shame she longed to depart,
But the wretched woman could not,
For she carried an unborn child.
She screamed and wept aloud;
Parted from her lionhearted hero,
She longed for death but could not die,
Unable to take her own life,
Unable to stem the tears from her eyes,
While her nose ran like a spring
And your sister-in-law could not wipe it away.
She wailed, “My bloodthirsty hero!”
“There is no cherished son to console me!
Oh, my mother!” she sobbed.
“The Creator has destined me for disaster,
And there is no choice but to bear it!
Among the many people, none can be my support;
The gray-maned hero left no son.
When grievous trouble befalls this forlorn head,
There is no choice but to endure it!
The birth mother of that gray-maned hero
Is, to me, the ill-fated Chürök,
The blessed brow of the noble one;
Above all, my mother
Is the Mecca of wretched Aichürök!”
