Despair of his precious life,
And flee away in panic!”
His figure appeared stately,
Standing apart from ninety-four others;
He seemed to prop up the sky and move mountains,
As he mounted in fury,
Sucking his pipe and raising an uproar,
Shrouding the face of the earth in steam.
He set a coal in his tinder pipe,
That faithless madman,
Fierce of aspect and mighty in venom,
And put a glowing ember in his pipe,
That expert killer.
He quickly set his shield upon his head,
Beat his war drum and raised a clamor,
Leveled his spear and stirred up strife,
Presenting a sight no man wished to see.
If you hear the sound
Of that madman’s war drum, flee far away!
When it sounds, his champion strikes;
Even an ordinary herd of horses
Breaks away in terror.
That Chinese warrior’s pageantry was immense;
If you ask about his war drum,
It was made from the hide of a wild bull,
And was three fathoms thick.
Everything simply fell apart,
And the breadth of the earth trembled,
When the war drum was beaten hard.
The countless horses in the valley,
The white-faced steeds upon the hills,
That high-spirited madman’s
Racers and swift horses mingled together.
The ground shook and thundered;
Every red-roan, every flat-maned horse,
All of your precious Seytek’s livestock
Panicked together with a roar.
When the horses stampeded,
There were more than a hundred herdsmen;
Some had horses at hand,
While others were caught unawares.
They had eaten the fat barren mares’ foals
And enjoyed comfort winter and summer;
Those overindulged herdsmen
Had still not had their fill of sleep.
The God-forsaken men lay flat,
Wearing trousers without drawstrings,
Stretched out fast asleep.
When the herd stampeded, they leapt up in confusion,
Their trousers still without drawstrings.
They bowed over their waistbands,
And amid such cries,
Their eyes still closed with sleep,
They found and mounted horses.
The herdsmen blustered about,
Striking out with their catch-poles.
Then Chongbilgich,
The most unyielding of men,
Whose fortune was wholly even,
Perfect and lacking nothing,
A mighty and imposing hero,
Stirred up an apocalyptic conflict,
Reached Talas and seized the horses.
Shouting in the Kakan tongue
And assuming a fearsome aspect,
Whenever the herd reached open ground
He went mad and began slaughtering;
He let no wild ass escape,
And shot his bow at anything that fled.
He croaked whenever a raven flew,
Roaring as he poured out his wrath;
The earth broke and stones rolled,
As he shouted the Kakan battle cry.
Dividing the herd into ten,
Harassing every last animal,
He raised a great commotion along the ridge
And drove them onward.
If any horse strayed aside,
He slashed it crosswise and felled it in heaps,
Slaughtering them as he went.
