You put an end to your mother’s good fortune;
Inflicting endless torment and hell,
My son, you broke my hands and feet.
You made your mother a wretched slave
And turned all I saw into a misty night.
You sucked my blood like a leech;
You scattered and shattered, my son,
Countless treasures and boundless wealth,
And let the enemy seize my herds.
You twisted what had been straight,
And turned it into the chill of somber autumn.
You leveled my hilltop into a hollow
And scattered my livestock in feasting.
You became an enemy and turned away;
Leading so many of your own blood,
You spared none but burned them.
You kindled strange spectacles among my people;
Without once looking back, for the sake of one khan,
You made red blood flow like water.
You heaped up hell like a mountain
And slaughtered my whole company.
My witless son, sink into the earth!
You destroyed my blue-green fruit,
And cut down my tall banner;
Could any enemy do worse than you?
You broke my terraced garden,
And devastated my flourishing strength.
You raised a mighty calamity
And showed your own kin a stronger arm
Than ever you showed the enemy.
You felled the plane tree,
And brought down the towering mountain.
You left sixty young women and widows
Wailing without exception.
You displayed your senseless valor
And dressed the whole people in black.
Can a human being be like you?
You black-hearted madman—
Can such a one be called human?
Before the camel crossed the cliff,
My son, you gathered the Argyn to plunder.
You had your white-haired mother
Beaten by the Argyn.
You made my blood flow freely
And set my soul aflame.
When your mother had grown old,
You accustomed her to endless torment.
My mad son, sprung from my own eyes,
Was I to blame for some ancient blood-feud,
That you had me dragged by a blue-gray calf?
You roused my long-buried fury;
Old Bakai, venerable as your forefather,
Without killing or disposing of him,
You had dragged about like a wolf-game carcass.
When your mother wailed aloud,
You had her breast split open.
You inflicted utter humiliation;
An enemy would be far better than you.
You made the torment surpass all bounds,
And made sorrow flourish in my heart.
You had me dragged by a blue calf
And branded my breast.
You did it not once but a thousand times,
And made such strife that you surpassed
Every other son born of humankind.
You drenched my poor head in blood
And sheared my hair like a mare’s.
In my old age you punished me
And reduced my food to scraps.
You left me no more than a spoonful of blood
And scorched my soul.
You ruined and scattered my herds;
You bent my waist fivefold.
Bringing calamity upon this head,
You deeply wounded my heart.
Though I begged, you did not heed my words;
You darkened all my days,
And stirred up, my foal, every last trace
Of my far-distant fury!
You created the most terrible strife,
