[Uncertain: Our lives are dear to Kolodon,]
If we do not bind it to our waists,
He himself was the khan of Beijing,
His majesty was lofty, his wrath fierce,
He was a man of exceptional fortune.
Of Kenen among these Kyrgyz,
Of the warrior who vaunts his prowess,
Of the champion who leads the people,
If we do not attack his assembled people,
[Uncertain: If we do not drive out his petty fury,]
[Uncertain: If we do not test courage in blood,]
Mighty, exalted True Tengri,
If we do not bind him to our waists,
Taking the Muslim people as a whole,
[Uncertain: Making their untamed ones into households by the thousand,]
[Uncertain: If we do not learn courage through blood.]
Mecca, upon which they rely,
[Uncertain: When battle begins, striking like lightning,]
If we do not drive them as far as Mecca itself,
[Uncertain: Extinguishing the fire they rekindled,]
Look among the worthy men,
To send the moon coursing from the summer's beginning,
To make the sun smile and send the day coursing,
Who struck your people, my child,
Listen and speak, oh my people, as you go,
He said to take Ala-Too and advance,
He had whetted them once again,
Let him not retreat from the Kazakh without dying,
You yourself prepared the arms and weapons,
Your fighting gaze was subdued,
When was our rear ever at ease?
A people said to bear a grieving fist,
Those people are the enemy who will fight,
Ala-Too is no land cheaply won,
They are not a people who will turn back,
They say the ground is narrow for an attack,
They say he is a mighty soul in battle,
To go without taking heed is an evil deed,
Would he call it evil, would it strike him?
If he should raise and display his army,
If he gives it to the padishah and nothing remains,
Trembling at the khan’s command,
Would he stand without gathering an army?
We too have word of it now,
If he takes an army from Hindustan,
If he breaks its pride at the very root,
Countless hosts stand at his command,
His countless treasures are like a houseful,
His property is filled with yellow gold,
If there is a soul amid his worldly wealth,
Leave behind what remains,
If the whole world were rich abundance,
If he were khan of a foreign people,
If there were a soul among that hearthful of people,
Would he stand there without giving it thought?
Without bending his back and waist,
Without taking a swift horse fit for him,
He would not simply leave it while still unborn,
He would not appoint a weak man as beg,
Would not a heroic khan take his seat?
If there is a man in the saddle,
If a man has but one doorway,
Would he not remain in the people’s place?
From the treasure of his in-laws’ people,
Would he not say, “I shall take my due”?
Through the heart of that very land,
Would he not say, “I shall take the world”?
Contending against the Kongdai people,
At the news that had turned in their favor.
Each man made his speech brief,
The best of them spoke noble words,
It was Khan Suurgulgan’s counsel.
Suurgulgan came forward and spoke,
What counsel did you see among them?
What you said of Suurgulgan,
Is the example of a tested young warrior,
Cherish him and show him as an example,
Suurgulgan set forth his thought,
When they heard Suurgulgan’s words,
Suurgulgan and Chyn Temir,
When the command to fight arrived,
They rushed like the men of Kemin,
At dawn they bristled upright,
Saying they would tirelessly persuade them with words,
The khans who formed a looming host,
Those fierce souls,
Saying they would submit them to his command,
