“My fathers Koshoy and Bakai still live,
And many souls have been stirred.
I retied my girdle,
Thinking: ‘If we seize this accursed wretch,
We shall nip him at the source.
If this boy lives,
He will bring strife upon his own nest.’
He was plainly my enemy.
My uncles, Koshoy and Khan Bakai,
Had worn out horses and seen many lands.
A woman’s thoughts grew troubled:
To my eyes, the child I had nursed
Appeared an enemy.
When he sucked my breast,
My heart withdrew and divided;
This deceitful, false world of filth
Seemed no bigger than a fistful.
He was himself a young stalk of the enemy,
The black eye of a foe
Who would ruin the people and ravage the land.
His nature was strange, his venom strong;
He would lay many of us low.
If his daily fortunes prospered,
If this child gained strength and grew,
He would encamp all along Ala-Too,
He would destroy the last of my line,
He would spread slaughter to my borders,
And settle every score with me.
He would leave the country in ruin,
Bring death upon us now,
Do all the evil he was born to do,
And kill every soul without sparing a hair.
His wrath would rise over our heads,
And bring us all to utter ruin.
Gorging and gnawing on rich rump meat,
Fattening as he destroyed my domain,
Trampling and ravaging my borders,
He would revel in this slaughter,
Dragging away the mighty
And wounding them upon the road.
However much I spoke, none understood.
Longing for every sort of evil,
I, the black-faced woman who foresaw it,
Exhausted all my wisdom;
My mind wearied and my heart burned,
And when I stood there helpless,
Straining my wits and pondering,
The light of God in heaven grew overcast,
And sixty cares and a thousand torments
Befell my unfortunate head.
My ribs ached as if torn apart,
And tears poured from my eyes.
‘How could Kanchoro, who sucked my left breast,
Ever become an enemy?’ I wondered.
‘He will devour all who remain,
Turn the river from its course,
Slaughter every living soul,
And do whatever he pleases.’
A fierce flame burst from my body.
From the right breast that Külchoro sucked
Pure white milk gushed forth.
‘He shall ascend the sovereign throne,
And not only he, but his children,
And all his descendants after them,
Shall possess an inheritance that never passes away.’
I knew what he would become;
I knew that the dark-eared, hungry lion
Would become a mighty hero,
And that his fathers and forefathers,
Dark and formidable beyond other men,
Would become an irresistible torrent.
Whenever I thought of Kanchoro,
My heart was pierced and divided.
‘Perhaps he will become a destined enemy’—
I saw this deed before my eyes.
He gathered the Argyn and made them his people,
Reached the wise man and held a feast:
The aged father of the nation,
The saint revered by the people,
The wise and valiant Khan Bakai.
