The noble hero will find his brave lion, they say,
And neighboring clans will camp together, they say,
And one rule will prevail in one land, they say,
So we bow our necks in submission.
He will look upon us with favor, they say,
And take us into his realm, they say;
Descendant of the noble hero,
We stand ready to become your inheritance.
Heed the words I have spoken;
I shall become your inheritance.
We know that your mighty presence
Can crush all who oppose you.
However much you spend, we are an inexhaustible
Mine of gold adornments;
Hero, if you lead us, we are your strength.
If you look closely and inquire,
The people behind you are your inheritance.
Turn and heed my words, brave lion:
All these people standing here,
If you spare them from death,
Will henceforth belong to you.
Understand these words of counsel;
Heed my words, noble lion.
If you tend this nation well,
We are falcons with collars,
We are steeds already saddled;
We shall stand as your support
And drive away your foes.
We shall strike the enemy without tiring;
Like sheltering boughs and branches,
We are plane trees in the barren waste.
For you, the hero who has come upon us,
We are a thousandfold inheritance you need.
We are the finest booty to fall into your hands,
One people among the Kalmyks;
We are the bright day of fortune
Granted to mortal man.
We are the stake to which you tether your horse;
Hero, if you keep us, we are your sustenance.
If you temper your mind and ponder deeply,
If you are truly a wise hero,
Descendant of the brave lion,
If you are the hero Seytek,
Do not begin calamity and strife;
Let us remain alive.
If you call us your former enemies,
Then slaughter us all.
Our devouring enemy Sarybai—
Such was his furious savagery.
Rain down your shots upon him;
Deliver us from the bloodthirsty tyrant,
From that black fiend himself,
From the unerring eye of hell,
From the anguish of his bitter torment,
From Sarybai’s ruinous hand,
Which ravaged nations and slaughtered peoples;
Free us from him.
Release the hands of this wretched people
And earn a blessing for yourself.
Among these people fallen into your hands
There are heroes and there are khans;
Sarybai oppressed the people
And made them suffer so.
That wrathful swine became powerful,
And the treasury’s people became his slaves;
He laid low every armed man
And drove them out to die.
None escaped punishment and strife;
Not a single soul remained.
Under the venom of that infidel’s days,
We amassed great wealth
And wept until our eyes went blind.
He left no living soul in peace,
But drove and tormented everyone.
He committed deeds against the innocent
And used force upon helpless souls.
Driving us before him, Sarybai
Reduced us all to submission.
Our strength utterly failed,
Only a spoonful of blood remained in us,
