And tore at them without sparing a soul.
The cur took them as plunder
And uprooted the settled folk.
He spread strife and turmoil through the world
And left souls burning in his wake.
At the slightest blink he took a life,
Sarybai, shaped like a wild boar.
Upon hero Kuyaly and Seytek
Descended the people’s fortune and blessing.
The torment inflicted by Sarybai
Became a mark of infamy carved in stone.
The madman burned in the fire;
The ruin he had brought upon the people
Had become a pestilent sickness,
Oppressing many people,
A cruel and grievous affliction
Against which all the heroes assembled.
Some souls were crazed and leaderless,
Wanderers with no one to pursue them,
Torn apart without a chief.
Those who always resisted,
Standing upon their honor,
Were slaughtered to the last.
That gnawing sorrow subsided.
“O Almighty, restore to me
My land he ravaged,” they prayed.
They held a feast without stint,
Spending all they possessed.
Baitailak, son of Bakai,
Thus began speaking to the people,
Softly beginning his weighty words.
The son whose name was renowned
Conceived an unfathomable plan
And held a feast beyond all measure.
When he said, “Hear these words of mine,”
The multitude blessed by Kyzýr
Thickened together like curdled yogurt.
“Baitailak’s wisdom
Is manifest and exemplary;
What he says is right,” they said.
When all their livestock and wealth
Were lavishly scattered,
And the finest words were spoken,
No pleasure was left unfulfilled.
Men grappled on horseback for the kök-börü,
Until their poles bent,
And heroic warriors jousted.
The victors threw down their rivals,
And mocked one another;
The fallen were left empty-handed,
While the victors claimed the prize.
It became an unimaginable spectacle,
An immense feast:
“The feast of hero Seytek,” they said,
“The design of Kuyaly and the people,” they said,
“For they saved our lives from torment.
It is the feast of our lion,” they said.
They bared the great camels’ teeth,
Let their lower lips droop,
Made their two humps tower,
And their necks arch like ducks,
Their shaggy manes trailing.
All the multitude
They made shout aloud with joy.
They slaughtered bright-red riding camels
And mares with fat a span thick.
They slaughtered equally from all four kinds,
And laid out wealth in equal measure.
They slaughtered livestock of all four kinds
And raised a mountain of meat like Ala-Too.
They meant to gather
Every person upon the earth.
They made the dew seem a swelling lake;
The people gathered and joined their strength,
Assembling the entire nation without exception.
The air steamed with meat and fat,
The people rejoiced and the land overflowed.
“It is dear Seytek’s feast,” they said,
“He whose back is like the lofty Ala-Too,
For he defeated Sarybai,” they said.
