Our sorrows gathered and overwhelmed us,
And our honor faded away.
You are the strength with which we gird our waists,
Our lioness maiden,
The warrior who brings us blessing.
Grim-featured is Sarybai,
A fearsome enemy such as this.
My charger’s back has grown sore from riding,
And my heart ached from fighting.
My noble steed grew weary,
And my noble head was hard-pressed.
Maiden champion, lioness,
We look to you as our protector.
Should the boastful infidel
Stir up some fresh conflict,
May you deliver the lionhearted warrior
And save him from suffering—
Such is my desire.
For many years before you came,
Against that fiend of surpassing cruelty,
When I thrust willingly, my spear would not pierce;
When I grappled, my strength fell short;
When I struck, my axe would not bite;
When I fired my white musket, its bullet would not pierce.
All the valiant men were destroyed,
And the world cried out that I was dead.
He prolonged the great turmoil,
Dragging maidens away as plunder,
Robbing me of much of my former self,
And thus battering my spirit.
He raided and humiliated us,
And seized my peaceful possessions by force.
When I wrestled him, my strength fell short;
When I struck true, my hand could not penetrate.
Against this infidel Sarybai,
This swaggering warrior,
Khans with sound arms died,
And every soul who grappled with him died.
My surging rage boiled,
But my strength fell short against the hellion;
Thus did my misery boil.”
So spoke Külchoro,
His exhaustion plain to see.
Unable to overcome Sarybai,
Külchoro despaired of life.
As Külchoro stood there,
Speaking softly and casting forth her fortune,
Kuyaly began to speak:
“This is the armor the monster’s infidel son
Wears when he enters combat;
This is the arm with which he wrestles;
That is the man who boasts himself a hero.
I have driven men down and crushed them into disgrace;
I am that wretched warrior.
His origin is alien and his venom strong;
Let us reach that doomed slave
And perish together with him.
I shall settle the proper reckoning;
If he fights, I shall find a way.
If the villain proves obstinate,
We shall gouge out his eyes.
If the villain grows enraged,
We shall lay him out full-length.
Thus shall we take revenge;
If the villain strains against us,
We shall settle his true account.”
She summoned her courage and made ready,
And in place of her former stratagem,
Inspiration came to her from the unseen.
She arranged all her battle gear,
And bloodthirsty Zulpukor
Was fastened bare at her waist.
Without speaking a word,
She growled and worked herself into fury,
Threatening Sarybai.
She thrust out her chest like a hungry lion,
Her eyes wide as an open grave.
The blood drained from her face,
And the sight of her distracted the mind.
If you observed the fierce-eyed maiden,
