And seemed able to swallow both slaves whole.
His mottled eyes bulged fiercely;
The jutting boss of his shield
Made the heart quail.
He was himself a warrior against warring foes;
If you have not heard of him,
He was Sary Khan’s own beloved son.
“If fate decrees it, I shall die;
I shall go as a supporting force
For the hero Semetey.”
Blood veiled his dark eyes,
And radiance lit his blood-red face.
Like a cloud breaking over a ridge,
With piercing cries and hoarse shouts,
Sary Khan came into sight.
His little banner streamed,
And he crushed all he encountered.
The club-like flesh of either cheek
Could have fed two lions;
If he passed through ten thousand troops on either side,
He looked able to slaughter them all.
He loomed like a high riverbank,
His figure towering like a mountain.
When you looked at his nose,
It was like the sheath of a saber;
His bristling mustache
Was like a Bukhara sword.
His temples were like rounded boulders,
And the hollows of his two eyes
Like pits dug by laborers.
Then Sary Khan arrived,
His little banner streaming,
Crushing all he met.
Sary Khan was a master spearman,
Truly skilled at finding advantage,
Most accomplished in stratagem,
And mighty as well.
Broad-jawed and free of tongue,
He was eloquent as well;
Sary Khan, wolf of war,
Was farsighted too.
Sary Khan charged in with a roar,
Calling, “Slaughter those who oppose you!
Drive your spears into the enemy!”
The great host of the Black Jediger
Split cleanly apart and scattered.
“Kanchoro and Kyyaz, those two traitors,
Are driving us here by force,” they said,
And clamored as they told
Their sorrows to mighty Sary Khan:
“We dwelt at ease in Jetisuu,
Calling him the son of the peerless hero,
But those two traitors drove us here under duress.
The Jediger in Jetisuu,
While the bloody-handed hero Manas lived,
Were a free people in a peaceful land.
We Jediger in Jetisuu
Were a free people whom not even
The slightest breeze dared touch.
We drank kumiss and courted girls,
Played knucklebones and the game of ordo,
Played chess and reveled noisily,
Rode young horses and hunted with birds;
We too were a people living in carefree splendor.
Then dust rose from Jeti-Özön—
Kanchoro and Kyyaz emerged as khans,
And the cries of those two accursed dogs
Nearly frightened the life from us.
We have no sword belts buckled for battle,
And no enemy among the red-tasseled Chinese
With whom we must fight to the death.
We have not even the smallest claim for money
Against the hero, Manas’s son.
We, the great host of the Black Jediger,
Were forced into this invasion
And now stand here suffering;
Our khan has proved a fool.
We, the great host of the Black Jediger—
