From her dear quail-like eyes,
Tears fell one after another;
From her dear currant-black eyes,
Tears streamed a whip's length.
Her heart was torn apart,
And tears poured from her eyes;
Allah's sun in the sky grew overcast,
And sixty cares came upon her head:
The dear bird called the kazgaldak
Flies without turning back in search of food;
How much this wretched head has endured
For you who came from my womb.
The dear bird called the bezbeldek
Flies crying shrilly in search of food;
How much toil I, poor woman, have borne
For you who came from my body.
You will set your hopes upon Kakan,
And abandon desolate your homeland
Of an orphaned son and widowed woman.
It is no enemy one can grapple with,
Yet you will begin a campaign against Beijing.
You will abandon desolate your village
Of sixty sons and a widowed woman.
Beijing is no easy land;
Rather than say, 'I have attacked Beijing,'
My valiant son, hear my words,
Say, 'I have entered into danger!'
Rather than say, 'I struck Kakan,'
Say, 'I have entered the dark night!'
Is great Beijing, left to mighty heroes,
A people lying unaware,
To be faced and easily conquered?
Is Kakanchin an easy land,
To be charged and raided?
The sovereign Chinese are renowned;
They have a custom of taking the heads
Of all who confront them.
My foal, my only one, heed my words:
No mortal has set his face
Toward Chin-Machin's Beijing,
And none who faced it remained alive.
Until the end of time,
Its daily affairs have prospered;
Those who traveled saying,
'I shall make holy war upon Kakan,' vanished.
You have remained to fight
The Beijing where your father went,
And have brought surpassing suffering
Upon me, your impetuous mother.
Beijing is five months away;
Do not call its passes an easy road.
Do not regard the unruly Black Chinese
As worthier than mortals.
It is a perilous road with forty gates;
Do not bring deep sorrow upon your mother,
Crying that you will pursue
The blood-price of your warrior father Manas!
Great Beijing is six months away;
Do not call its cliffs an easy road.
Do not call Beijing, land of forty Chinese tribes,
An easy people upon whom to bring strife.
When I lament, I have many words;
There is a teeming Chinese people.
Having been utterly parted from the khans,
I, your ill-fated mother,
Have cause to remain lamenting.
They have an army and a Jang-Jung khan;
In swarming Kakan
There are creatures of many kinds.
If we follow the tradition,
If we ask those who know,
It has peoples of countless kinds;
Do not challenge them, my orphan,
For they have strength to engulf you.
My pale, soft young camel,
My goshawk, my morning star,
Saying, 'I shall campaign against Beijing,'
You have prepared for danger;
Saying, 'I shall campaign against Kakan,'
You have readied the rangy courser!"
